Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
Available online 4 July 2023
1566-2535/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information Fusion
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus
A survey on fairness-aware recommender systems✩
Di Jin a, Luzhi Wang a, He Zhang b, Yizhen Zheng b, Weiping Ding c,∗, Feng Xia d, Shirui Pan e,∗
a College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
b Department of Data Science and AI, Faculty of IT, Monash University, Australia
c School of Information Science and Technology, Nantong University, China
d School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Australia
e School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Australia
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Recommender systems
Fairness
Trustworthiness
Survey
A B S T R A C T
As information filtering services, recommender systems have extremely enriched our daily life by providing
personalized suggestions and facilitating people in decision-making, which makes them vital and indispensable
to human society in the information era. However, as people become more dependent on them, recent
studies show that recommender systems potentially own unintentional impacts on society and individuals
because of their unfairness (e.g., gender discrimination in job recommendations). To develop trustworthy
services, it is crucial to devise fairness-aware recommender systems that can mitigate these bias issues. In
this survey, we summarize existing methodologies and practices of fairness in recommender systems. Firstly,
we present concepts of fairness in different recommendation scenarios, comprehensively categorize current
advances, and introduce typical methods to promote fairness in different stages of recommender systems.
Next, after introducing datasets and evaluation metrics applied to assess the fairness of recommender systems,
we will delve into the significant influence that fairness-aware recommender systems exert on real-world
industrial applications. Subsequently, we highlight the connection between fairness and other principles of
trustworthy recommender systems, aiming to consider trustworthiness principles holistically while advocating
for fairness. Finally, we summarize this review, spotlighting promising opportunities in comprehending
concepts, frameworks, the balance between accuracy and fairness, and the ties with trustworthiness, with
the ultimate goal of fostering the development of fairness-aware recommender systems.
1. Introduction
Recommendation systems (RSs) are information filtering systems
that are expected to suggest products and services, i.e., items, that
most likely interest a user [ 1]. The suggestions are related to vari-
ous decision-making processes for a user, such as which products to
purchase, which videos to watch and which songs to listen. As the
world becomes more information-overloaded, recommender systems
are particularly useful when users need to choose an item from an
overwhelming selection offered by a service. Recommender systems
are pervasive and have been utilized in various fields including e-
commerce [ 2–4], economics [ 5–7], education [ 8–10], etc. For the
e-commerce industry, Amazon, for example, distributes product infor-
mation provided by merchants to users based on their history of pur-
chases or website interaction. Remarkably, its recommendation engine
accounts for three-quarters of its total revenue [ 11]. In the economics
industry, the loans domain can be recommended to users based on
✩ This project is funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No: 62272340 and 61976120) and ARC Future Fellowship (No. FT210100097).
∗ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: jindi@tju.edu.cn (D. Jin), wangluzhi@tju.edu.cn (L. Wang), he.zhang1@monash.edu (H. Zhang), yizhen.zheng1@monash.edu (Y. Zheng),
dwp9988@163.com (W. Ding), f.xia@ieee.org (F. Xia), s.pan@griffith.edu.au (S. Pan).
their attributes information such as annual income, address, occupa-
tion, and so on [ 12]. Lastly, in the education industry, Massive Open
Online Course (MOOC), one of the leading online learning providers,
recommends courses to users based on their historical opinions [ 13].
However, as the development of recommender systems surges and
the reliance on them grows, these systems can lead to huge negative
impacts on society and individuals due to unfairness. The causes of un-
fairness and their undesirable outcomes are numerous and significant.
For instance, a loan domain recommender system may recommend
loan domains influenced by a user’s sensitive personal attributes, such
as age, gender, and race. As a result, minority groups such as senior
citizens, women workers, and ethnic minorities may suffer worsening
financial situations by being recommended loan domains with higher
interest rates, which is obviously unfair. The second example is MOOC
course recommendations [13], in which more than 40% of the courses
are taught by American teachers, while the remaining courses from 73
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.101906
Received 29 May 2023; Received in revised form 27 June 2023; Accepted 28 June 2023

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
2
D. Jin et al.
Fig. 1. The organizational layout of this survey.
countries are rarely recommended to or enrolled in by online users. Due
to the vast geographic imbalance in MOOC recommendations, teachers
in smaller or less-known places faced a great disadvantage when at-
tracting students. In a similar way, Amazon tended to recommend items
from larger merchants over smaller merchants. Because of this, smaller
merchants would find it difficult to compete with large merchants,
even if they offered better prices or quality. Although recommender
systems are supposed to mitigate these unfairnesses, they can actually
exacerbate them in the recommendation pipeline.
Driven by these unintentional issues, people increasingly yearn for
fairness since it is critical and essential in developing recommender
systems that can be trusted. First, fairness benefits users, items, and
even recommender systems themselves [ 14]. For example, in a fair
recommender system, users can obtain more relevant information,
including niche information, which can aid in breaking out of the
cocoon of information. As minor items are allocated more exposure,
the Matthew effect [15] is lessened, encouraging providers to enhance
their creativity and diversity. By providing equal quality of service
for objects from diverse backgrounds, fair recommender systems can
also gain long-term interest due to positive feedback from users and
item providers. Second, a global consensus has recently been built on
enhancing the trustworthiness of AI systems [ 16–18], including fair-
ness, robustness, explainability, privacy, etc. Devising fairness-aware
recommender systems directly contribute to the trustworthiness of
RSs [ 18]. Moreover, studying the connections between fairness and
other aspects (e.g., robustness [ 19]) benefits the comprehensive build-
ing of trustworthy systems [ 16,17]. Finally, compliance with laws
and regulations [ 14] requires recommender systems to be fair when
interacting with people because fairness is one of the cornerstones of
keeping social order. For example, discrimination against vulnerable
groups of people based on sensitive information (e.g., gender, age,
race [ 20,21]) is forbidden by current anti-discrimination laws [ 22],
which also require that similar people should be treated similarly to
ensure equality.
Although the fairness of general machine learning tasks (e.g., image
classification) has been extensively explored [ 23], building fairness-
aware recommender systems is no-trivial since the following chal-
lenges. (1) Diverse and unique fairness concepts . Various real-world
scenarios of RSs encompass diverse fairness concepts, such as group or
individual fairness [ 24,25], static or dynamic fairness [ 26,27]. More-
over, the unique characteristics (e.g., severing sellers and buyers si-
multaneously, and changing recommendation trends driven by time)
of recommender systems call for elaborated fairness concepts. For
example, the fairness concerning multi-party benefits (e.g., multi-sided
fairness) or dynamic evolution (e.g., dynamic fairness [ 27]) should be
taken into account since recommender systems interact with both users
and item providers in a dynamic process. Therefore, achieving fairness
for different recommender systems remains a complex task. (2) Full
life cycle of fairness demands. Unfairness exists in the whole life-cycle
of recommender systems because of their dynamic interactions with
users and items (as shown in Fig. 2). This fact requires researchers and
practitioners to enhance fairness at each stage of developing recom-
mender systems to avoid learning historical unfairness from the last
loop and even amplifying it into the subsequent feedback loop. (3)
Adverse effects of improving fairness. Existing studies have demonstrated
the existence of the trade-off between fairness and accuracy in recom-
mender systems [ 28], which makes designing recommender systems
that simultaneously prioritize fairness while maintaining satisfactory
performance not easy. Moreover, improving fairness of recommender
systems can potentially influence other aspects (e.g., robustness, pri-
vacy) of trustworthiness. For example, a recent work shows that in-
dividual fairness is at the cost of privacy [ 29]. Thus, evaluating the
influence of fairness should be taken into account when comprehen-
sively building fairness-aware recommender systems. Therefore, it is
imperative to summarize current efforts and advancements in building
fairness-aware recommender systems, which contribute to developing
trustworthy, responsible, and socially beneficial AI services.
In this survey, fair recommender systems refer to recommender
systems that can adapt to different users/items and provide indiscrimi-
nate recommendation services to them. Related reviews include surveys
on recommender systems, fair recommender systems, and trustworthy
recommender systems. Our survey differs from those surveys in that it
elaborates on the existing advancements in the fair recommender sys-
tems as well as how fairness interacts with other aspects of trustworthy
recommender systems. (1) Surveys on recommender systems review
the advancements of performance-oriented methods on recommender
systems. Wu et al. [30] explore the impact of Graph Neural Networks on
different categories of recommender systems. Deldjoo et al. [31] inves-
tigate the impact of adversarial learning on the security and accuracy of
recommender systems. Wu et al. [32] introduce the modeling of collab-
orative filtering techniques in different types of recommender systems
(e.g., content-rich recommender systems, sequential recommender sys-
tems). (2) Recently, surveys on fair recommendation systems have also
emerged. For example, Wang et al. [ 14] explore various perspectives
on unfairness issues and provide an overview of existing approaches,
which include data-oriented, ranking, and re-ranking methods. Zehlike
et al. [ 33] delve into how ranking methods impact the fairness of
recommender systems. They introduce the fair ranking framework and

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
3
D. Jin et al.
Fig. 2. The lifecycle of recommender systems. In the lifecycle, the data collection phase collects data from users; the model learning phase feeds data into the model for training;
the loop phase provides recommendation results to users. In the lifecycle, biases in each phase will have an unfair impact on the recommender system. With the operation and
feedback loop of recommender systems, existing biases can be potentially amplified in the following phases of recommender systems.
summarize the evaluation of fair ranking methods. Chen et al. [ 34]
describe the existence of biases in recommender systems and describe
ways to address them. Unlike these surveys, our survey categorizes
current methods into pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing
methods; we also present comprehensive and fine-grained taxonomy
on each of them (e.g., data re-labeling, data re-sampling, and data
modification in pre-processing methods). (3) Current surveys on trust-
worthy recommender systems allocate their attention to several dif-
ferent aspects of trustworthiness (e.g., explainability, robustness) [ 18,
35] or present a conceptual framework of trustworthy recommender
systems [36]. In contrast, our survey focuses on comprehensively sum-
marizing current advancements in fairness and discussing the influence
on other aspects of trustworthy recommender systems from the view of
enhancing fairness.
We introduce the theory and practice of fairness-aware recom-
mender systems in this survey. As a first step, we describe the concepts
and formulations of recommender systems and fairness in Section 2 .
Then, we categorize and illustrate methods promoting fairness in dif-
ferent stages of recommender systems in Section 3 after carefully
analyzing related literature regarding fairness in recommender sys-
tems. Specifically, these processing stages include pre-processing, in-
processing, and post-processing. In Section 4 , we collect and collate
datasets and evaluation metrics used in literature exploring fairness
in recommender systems. Following that, we discuss the industrial
applications of recommendation systems that consider fairness in e-
commerce, education, and social activities in Section 5 . Moreover,
Section 6 explores the connection between fairness and other ethical
principles of a trustworthy recommender system such as explainability,
robustness, privacy, and so on. Section 7 provides a big picture of
future directions of fairness-aware recommender systems from different
dimensions, including concepts, frameworks, trade-off, and trustworthi-
ness. Last but not least, Section 8 summarizes this survey’s importance
and influence within the context of trustworthy recommender systems.
Fig. 1 illustrates the organizational layout of this survey, as well as
the logical connections between each section. The contributions of this
survey can be enumerated as follows:
• A Holistic Taxonomy of Fairness-aware RS Methods. Com-
pared to previous surveys, this study presents a more comprehen-
sive taxonomy for methods that improve fairness in recommender
systems. These methods are grouped in accordance with their
roles in the three phases of implementing recommender systems:
pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing. A useful and
intuitive framework is provided for the adoption or understanding
of these methods by interested researchers.
• Building Connections between Fairness and Other Ethical
Principles. This study demonstrates how fairness relates to other
ethical principles in trustworthy recommendation systems. It en-
courages people to consider holistically while advocating fairness.
A question such as, does promoting fairness affect other ethical di-
mensions of trustworthy recommendation systems, e.g., explain-
ability and robustness, should be asked.
• Evaluation of Existing Challenges and Future Direction. We
highlight the existing limitations and challenges of existing
fairness-promoting methods for recommender systems. In future
works, these problems should be further considered and ad-
dressed. In particular, the definition of fairness is not consistent
between studies, which can easily cause confusion. Additionally,
despite improvements in fairness, existing methods neglect the
relationship between fairness and other ethical dimensions of
trustworthy systems, which can deteriorate other ethical metrics.
2. Concepts and formulations
2.1. Recommender systems
A recommender system serves as an information filtering system
that learns and predicts the user’s interest in an item [37]. According to
relevant information such as items, users, and the interaction between
them, the recommender system provides users with personalized ser-
vices and recommends suitable items to them [38]. Given a user 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈,
an item 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 , where 𝑈 is a user set and 𝑉 is an item set, the goal of
the recommender system is to learn an information filter𝑓 (⋅) to capture
user preference. The predicted score 𝑦𝑢,𝑣 for the user’s preferences in
items is [30]:
𝑦𝑢,𝑣 = 𝑓 (𝑢, 𝑣). (1)
The lifecycle of the recommender system can be abstracted into a
feedback loop composed of users, data, and models. The loop consists
of three phases as shown in Fig. 2 , including, a data collection phase,
a model learning phase, and a feedback phase. The data collection
phase is established between users and data, and it collects users’
and items’ attribute information, as well as user–item interaction data.
The learning phase is built with the data and the model. In specific,
this refers to the development of a recommendation model based on
the collected data. A recommender system utilizes historical data to
forecast the probability of an item being recommended to a user. This
step delivers the suggested results to users to satisfy their information
needs. This phase will impact users’ future behavior and decisions.
The recommender system can be divided into several types accord-
ing to the different scenarios:

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
4
D. Jin et al.
Fig. 3. Fairness-aware methods in the three stages. The pre-processing stage encompasses several methods like data re-labeling, data re-sampling, and data modification. These
pre-processing methods are independent of recommendation models. The in-processing stage is mainly to improve the fairness of the model from a method perspective. The
in-processing stage involves various techniques, including regularization-based methods, causal-inference-based methods, adversarial-learning-based methods, reinforcement-learning-
based methods, and ranking-optimization-based methods. The post-processing stage also employs model-independent methods, treating the model as a black box and solely processing
the model’s output results. The post-processing methods include non-parametric re-ranking methods and parametric re-ranking methods.
• Session-based RSs take each session as the input unit, captur-
ing the user’s short-term preferences and dynamic interests as
reflected in session transitions [ 39].
• Conversational-based RSs are recommender systems that can
interact with users in multiple rounds in real-time, eliciting users’
dynamic preferences and taking actions based on their current
needs [40].
• Content-enriched RSs incorporate some auxiliary data related to
users and items to enhance representation learning and seman-
tic relevance. These auxiliary data may include textual content,
knowledge graphs, etc [32].
• Social RSs are defined as any recommender system for the social
media domain. This type of recommender systems improves rec-
ommendation performance by incorporating social relations into
the recommender system [13].
There are unique unfairnesses in different types of recommender sys-
tems, and we introduce these unfairness issues and the biases that
generate unfairness in the follow-up.
2.2. Fairness
Fairness is a concept that originated in sociology, economics, and
law [41–43]. Its definition in the Oxford English Dictionary is ‘‘imper-
fect and just treatment or behavior without favoritism or discrimina-
tion’’. In the context of recommender systems, fairness requires that
recommender systems treat all users and items equally. For example, in
loan approval based on recommender systems [12], the systems are fair
if the approval of an applicant seeking a loan is not influenced by the
user’s attributes (e.g., gender, race). We can develop fair recommender
systems when bias or unfairness is eliminated from systems [ 14]. In
this section, we first categorize causes of unfairness and then present
common fairness expressions that can measure the existence of bias.
2.2.1. Causes of unfairness
As depicted in Fig. 2 , the unfairness of a recommender system
appears in its whole lifecycle, including the data collection phase, the
model learning phase, and the feedback loop phase. According to the
position of bias in the three phase, we divide bias in the recommender
system into three categories, namely the data bias, model bias, and
feedback bias. Subsequently, we will elucidate these biases by showing
how they result in unfairness in recommender systems.
Data Bias. Currently, recommender systems are always trained
on large datasets, which usually contain user information like user
behaviors (e.g. incorrect clicks), sensitive attributes (e.g. gender), and
the interaction between users and items. However, training datasets
potentially include various biases. These biases can lead to unfair
recommendations, which may cause undesirable or even disastrous
consequences for human life and society. Next, we will introduce some
common biases in datasets.
User Bias . User attribute bias is a common user bias. In recom-
mender systems, some sensitive attributes like age [ 44], geographical
location [45], gender [46], and profession [47] are important sources of
information for recommender systems to understand user preferences.
However, sometimes users’ attributes (e.g., age, gender) can cause
biased recommendation results. For example, age may be an effective
feature in a music recommender system as they can recommend music
to users according to their ages [ 48]. In general, youngsters have
a higher preference for hip-hop music than senior people. However,
sometimes users of a certain age group may wish to jump out of the
cocoon of age information and explore different kinds of music. For
the gender attribute, some researchers [ 49–51] observe the promotion
of high-paying jobs varies by gender. In MOOC, a recommender system
attempt to guide course resources to students [ 52], the geographic
location and nationality of teachers also influence which courses are
recommended to students [13].
In addition to user attribute bias, user selection bias is also an
important part of user bias. User selection bias refers to the behavioral
bias when the user selects items, which usually exists in user explicit
feedback. The existence of biases in user feedback data can lead to
inconsistencies between user preferences and behavior records [ 53].
For instance, music streaming media recommender systems provide
playlists based on the music preference of users [ 54], which can be
affected by the user feedback bias. Specifically, during the recommen-
dation process, the model is updated online based on user feedback.
In a music recommender system, explicit feedback (e.g., ratings of
items [55]) can be the track marked ‘‘favorite’’ by the user. However,
users may have wrongly clicked like tags, which will lead to explicit
feedback bias [56].
Exposure Bias. Exposure Bias refers to the situation where users
only have access to a portion of the available item set [ 57]. The
exposure bias is often present in implicit feedback data, which usually
refers to whether the user interacts with the item, including some
purchases, clicks, and other behaviors [ 58]. For example, e-commerce
sites like Amazon allow users to provide feedback on recommended
items beyond the user interface by searching and browsing various
product pages. The user’s browsing behaviors may contain incorrect
clicks, and these mistakes can make the recommender system misjudge
the user’s preference, which results in an unfair recommendation [11].
In a music recommender system, a handful of popular artists may
garner the majority of traffic, thereby underexposing less mainstream
artists. If this bias remains unaddressed, recommender systems could
adversely affect the experience of diverse users and items on the
platform due to continuous interaction with biased recommendations,

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
5
D. Jin et al.
and thus the training of models using biased interactions in subsequent
timeframes [26]. In music streaming media recommender systems, the
explicit feedback can be the track marked ‘‘favorite’’ by the user, and
implicit feedback can be the number of times a track has been played.
However, users may pay less attention to the music app while doing
other activities, such as exercising, reading late at night, or commuting,
and the music is looped multiple times, which can lead to an invisible
feedback bias [56].
Time Bias. Some time-related recommendations, such as news rec-
ommendations, session-based recommendations, and job recommen-
dations, heavily rely on direct user–item interactions to understand
user preferences and provide specialized recommendations. However,
freshly released data could unfairly overrepresent users’ long-term
interests, which is unfair to learn users’ preferences. If we continue to
disclose items at time 𝑡+𝑛 according to the fairness limitations at time𝑡,
even though an item that is popular at time 𝑡 may no longer be popular
at time 𝑡 + 𝑛, we will neglect the long-term fairness dynamics [27].
This will ignore the long-term dynamic process of fairness, which leads
to recommended bias. For example, the goal of job recommendations
is to recommend job advertisements to job seekers. Job seekers prefer
to click after seeing a new job advertisement. New job advertisements
obtain higher click rates as a result of this behavior than older job
advertisements. Consequently, jobs of longer-lasting professionals are
less likely to be recommended. However, job seekers are driven by their
long-term career aspirations when contemplating jobs. Advertising rec-
ommendations that are consistent with these preferences are more
advantageous to job seekers [59]. Therefore, it is unfair to recommend
recent advertisements to users without considering users’ long-term
interests.
Cold-start Bias. The above biases only consider unfairness in the case
of warm-start recommendation. The primary source of unfairness in this
instance is data biases (e.g., clicks or pageviews). However, the recom-
mender system will meet a cold start problem when lacks data. When
a new user or item enters the system, the cold-start problem occurs
at which point the recommender system fails to provide personalized
recommendations because it lacks sufficient data on user behaviors
or item attributes [60]. Solving a cold-start problem is usually using
prior knowledge from warm-start recommendations to train cold-start
recommender systems. The cold-start bias refers to the bias of this prior
knowledge in warm-start recommender systems. These biases will be
brought into the cold-start recommender system when training, and
cause the unfairness phenomena [61]. The unfairness phenomena can
be particularly problematic because the unfairness caused by cold-start
recommendations can persist and accumulate throughout the lifespan
of the item, making it increasingly difficult to mitigate unfairness [62].
Model Bias. The model learning phase uses the collected data in
the data collection phase to train the recommendation model, the core
of which is to deduce user preferences from past interaction data to
predict the possibility of users choosing unvisited targets. Models with
design flaws (e.g., ranking bias) may further magnify biases in the input
data.
Ranking Bias. Some loss functions can further exacerbate unfairness
during the training of recommender systems. These loss functions affect
the predicted score of the item, which in turn affects the recom-
mendation ranking list of recommender systems. For example, Wan
et al. [63] demonstrate that point losses (e.g., MSE loss) and pair-
wise losses (e.g., BPR loss) are sensitive to popular items. These loss
functions give popular items higher scores than unpopular items, which
amplifies exposure bias during the training of recommender systems.
Zhu et al. [64] also prove that the BPR loss lacks the fairness constraint
of equal opportunity ranking for reducing bias.
Feedback Bias. A feedback loop exists in every recommender sys-
tem, which provides recommendation results of a model to users for
selection. In the feedback loop, users and a recommender system
interact and co-evolve. Users’ preferences and behaviors are updated
through the recommender system, and the recommender system uses
the updated data for self-reinforcing. This feedback loop mechanism not
only generates bias, but also exacerbates the bias over time, resulting in
a gradual deterioration of the fairness ecosystem. In the following para-
graph, we introduce the popularity bias, which is a typical feedback
bias.
Popularity Bias. A few popular items are frequently recommended,
while most others are disregarded. Users consume these recommenda-
tions, and their responses are recorded and added to the system. Over
time, the recommender system recommends popular items to users,
continuously collects user feedback on popular items, and adds them
to the training set, making the data distribution more unbalanced,
which will result in more and more recommendation results focusing on
popular items [65]. The existence of popularity bias will also constantly
change the user’s preference representation, making it challenging for
the recommender system to capture the user’s true preference. For
example, Naghiaei et al. [66] investigate the impact of popularity issues
on book recommender systems. Their work shows that recommender
systems tend to recommend popular items frequently, and there is a
strong correlation existing between the popularity of books and the
frequency with which they are recommended. Most books are not
exposed to users by the recommender system, while popular books are
highlighted more frequently.
2.2.2. Fairness expressions in recommender systems
A recommender system can be employed in multiple scenarios, and
the unfairness concerns in each scenario are different. Next, we present
the expressions of fairness in recommender systems from different
perspectives.
Individual Fairness vs. Group Fairness. Given two similar users
𝑢𝑖, 𝑢𝑗 ∈ 𝑈, individually fairness-aware recommender systems hope to
give similar prediction scores for samples 𝑢𝑖 and 𝑢𝑖 [24]. For exam-
ple, in a healthcare recommendation system, two patients exhibiting
similar pathologies should receive recommendations of equivalent qual-
ity [67]. Methods for individual fairness solve the problem of statistical
equality through pairwise comparisons between similar users. The
formal definition of individual fairness can be expressed as 𝑓 (𝑢𝑖, 𝑣) ≈
𝑓 (𝑢𝑗 , 𝑣). where 𝑓 (⋅) is a recommender system, 𝑣 is an item.
Group fairness necessitates that protected groups receive treatment
akin to that of advantaged groups [25]. As a typical group fairness,
demographic parity [15] requires that the probability that the pro-
tected group (e.g., female group) is predicted to be a positive sam-
ple (e.g., job offers) is equal to the probability that the advantaged
group (e.g., male group) is predicted to be a positive sample. Given
a protected group 𝑈𝑖 and an advantaged group 𝑈𝑗, the demographic
parity of the recommender system can be formalized as 𝑃 𝑟(𝑦𝑈𝑖,𝑣 =
1|𝑈𝑖) = 𝑃 𝑟(𝑦𝑈𝑗 ,𝑣 = 1|𝑈𝑗 ).
Static Fairness vs. Dynamic Fairness. Static fairness is defined as
providing a short-term fair recommender system regardless of changes
in the recommendation environment. Zhang et al. [68] propose that
the concept of recommendation fairness proposed by most methods is
static fairness, i.e., the protected group is fixed during the recommenda-
tion process. As an example, traditional matrix-based recommendation
strategies are aimed at maximization of users’ immediate gratifica-
tion, assuming that their preferences remain static. However, they
potentially ignore users’ long-term interests.
Dynamic fairness [27] is defined as considering dynamic factors
in the environment to maintain fairness. Dynamic fairness is related
to time bias. Some works argue that recommending an item that was
recommended a long time ago should have the same probability as
recommending an item that was recommended recently. Assuming 𝑣𝑡
represents an item appears in time𝑡 and 𝑣𝑡+1 represents an item appears
in time 𝑡 + 1, the dynamic fairness can be defined as: 𝑃 𝑟(𝑦𝑢,𝑣𝑡 = 1|𝑣𝑡) =
𝑃 𝑟𝑡(𝑦𝑢,𝑣𝑡+1 = 1|𝑣𝑡+1). In real-world recommender systems, it can also be
expressed as
𝑃 𝑟(𝑦𝑢,𝑣𝑡 =1|𝑣𝑡)
𝑃 𝑟(𝑦𝑢,𝑣𝑡+1 =1|𝑣𝑡+1) < 𝜉, where 𝜉 is a slack factor used to adjust
the dynamic fairness granularity for recommender systems.

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
6
D. Jin et al.
Table 1
Summary of methods. We classify existing methods based on the phase of implementation, the technology utilized, the bias issues encountered, the suggested
application scenarios, and the official method names.
Stage Technologies Bias Background Methods
Pre-processing
Data re-labeling Popularity Bias General RSs IFNA a [69]
User Bias General RSs DPTC a [70]
Data re-sampling User Bias General RSs MPML a [71], HPO [72], RNS [73], HFD a [74]
Data modification User Bias General RSs HURR a [75], CFAI a [76], RSNMF [77], EPTB a [78]
In-processing
Regularization
Cold-start Bias Cold-start RSs CLOVER [79]
Exposure Bias Social RSs MinDiff [80], FRRPC a [81], SERec [82], IDLR a
[83]
Popularity Bias General RSs FARL a [84], CPBLR a [85]
User Bias General RSs CFIFD a [86], FFFU a [87], SLIM [88], FaiRecSys
[89], MMIUR a [64], F2VAE [90], FairRec [91],
IURPFa [92], FRRP a [81], FATBR a [93]
Causal inference
Cold-start Bias Cold-start RSs CLOVER [79]
Exposure Bias Social RSs DHRS a [94], ABPUL a [95]
Popularity Bias General RSs IANP a [96], PDA [97], MACR a [98], DANCER [99]
User Bias
Content RSs FairTED [100]
General RSs CSBRS a [101], SHT [102], RTDLE a [103], TPFB a
[104], AdaRequest [105], InvPref [106],
DeSCoVeR [107]
Session-based RSs AIPB a [20]
Adversarial learning User Bias General RSs FairRec [91], FRFC [108], CGWG a [109]
Reinforcement learning Exposure Bias Social RSs FCPO [27], MORL [110]
Popularity Bias Conversational RSs Popcorn [111]
Ranking
Exposure Bias Social RSs RDC [112]
Popularity Bias General RSs CPR [63]
User Bias General RSs MMIUR a [64]
Others
Exposure Bias Session-based RSs CLRec [113], SAR-Net [114]
User Bias Conversational RSs CUAB a [56]
User Bias Social RSs FairSR [115]
Post-processing Non-parametric re-ranking Exposure Bias Cold-start RSs GEN [62]
General RSs CPFair [116], FairMatch [117], TFROM [118]
Parametric re-ranking Exposure Bias General RSs HyperFair [119]
aIndicates the method has no specific name. We named it with the abbreviation of its article name.
Single-sided Fairness vs. Multi-sided Fairness. There are multiple
stakeholders in a recommender system. Single-sided fairness refers to
maintaining the interests (i.e., fairness) of a single role. For example,
when recommending items to users, it only pays attention to whether
the user has received a fair recommendation. Multi-sided fairness refers
to maintaining the interests of multiple roles [116]. For example, con-
sumers expect the recommender system to fairly recommend products
they are interested in, while suppliers wish their products to be fairly
exposed to consumers. Multi-sided fairness aims to maintain the fair-
ness of both consumers and suppliers. A typical multi-sided fairness is
to increase diversity [120] in recommendation results, ensuring that the
average exposure of items across multiple aspects is balanced [121]. In
addition, it is plausible to enforce proportional exposure of both groups
relative to their average utility, i.e.,
∑|𝑉𝑖|
𝑖=1 𝑃 𝑟(𝑦𝑢,𝑉𝑖 =1|𝑉𝑖)
|𝑉𝑖| =
∑|𝑉𝑗 |
𝑗=1 𝑃 𝑟(𝑦𝑢,𝑉𝑗 =1|𝑉𝑗 )
|𝑉𝑗 | ,
where 𝑉𝑖 and 𝑉𝑗 are two different item groups.
Others. Other common perspectives of fairness in recommender
systems are:
• Ranking Fairness. The fairness of sorting is usually reflected in
statistical equality or equality of opportunity. A simple inter-
pretation of statistical parity in ranking is the assurance that
the proportion of protected individuals appearing within a rank-
ing prefix exceeds a predetermined threshold [122]. In general,
ranking fairness asks that similar items or groups of items re-
ceive similar visibility, they appear at similar positions in the
ranking [123].
• Causal Fairness. Most recommender systems are based on statis-
tics; however, this ignores causality in the original data. Unlike
individual fairness and equal opportunity, causal fairness not
only considers observational data but also incorporates additional
causal relationships within them [97]. Counterfactual fairness
is a typical causal fairness. It demands that the predictions of
recommender systems remain consistent in both the factual and
the counterfactual world [23,124].
• Long-term Fairness. Long-term fairness is affected on time [110]
and considers the long-term impact of fairness interventions [125].
It is similar to dynamic fairness in that it considers the long-term
impact on user preferences [126].
• Envy-freeness Fairness. Do et al. [127] propose a criterion of envy-
freeness fairness, stating that each user should prefer their own
recommendations over those of other users.
Other fairness concepts, like Rawlsian Maximin Fairness or Maximin-
Shared Fairness, can be found in recent literature on fairness [14].
3. Methods for fairness-aware recommender systems
In this section, we summarize methods for improving the fairness
of recommender systems and present them in three stages of imple-
mentation, including pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing
(as shown in Fig. 3). In addition, we summarize the fairness-aware
recommendation methods in Table 1, specifically including the biases
the methods can address, the types of fairness-aware recommendation
methods, and other important information.

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
7
D. Jin et al.
Fig. 4. Regularization-based fairness-aware methods.
3.1. Pre-processing methods for fairness recommender systems
In the pre-processing stage, fairness-enhancing methods are used to
minimize biases in the training datasets. It is possible for these biases
to be amplified throughout the lifecycle of a recommender system,
resulting in unfair recommendations for users. We divide these fairness-
aware pre-processing methods into three categories according to data
debiasing methods.
3.1.1. Data re-labeling
Re-labeling changes the labels of the training dataset to remove
biases in the input data. Some recommender systems predict user
preferences using binary implicit feedback labels, like ‘‘click’’ or ‘‘not
click’’. However, there may be noise in the feedback labels, i.e., clicks
do not necessarily represent positive feedback, and missing clicks do
not necessarily represent negative feedback. These ‘‘noisy’’ labels can
lead to a drop in model performance. Wang et al. [ 69] design a self-
supervised re-labeling framework for noise in implicit feedback. The
framework dynamically generates pseudo labels for user preferences to
mitigate noise in both observed and unobserved feedback data.
3.1.2. Data re-sampling
Unbalanced data distribution may lead to a decrease in the training
effect of recommender systems. Montanari et al. [ 72] design a data
sampling algorithm to ensure that the sampling is uniform and not
affected by the distribution. They randomly select a certain percentage
of users and delete their interaction information. This type of re-
sampling method reduces the size of the dataset for approximately
the same proportion of users and maintains the dynamic nature of
user profiles. Celis et al. [ 74] propose a subsampling method that
proportionally subsamples the dataset based on different sensitive at-
tributes. Ding et al. [ 73] design a negative sampler that creates data
resembling generates data similar to the exposure data through feature-
matching techniques instead of selecting directly from exposure data.
The sampler forces the distribution of positive and negative data to be
balanced by adding negative samples.
3.1.3. Data modification
The main idea of data modification is to augment or modify the
biased data to reduce the bias. For example, some recommender sys-
tems may utilize textual data (e.g. job recommender systems, news
recommender systems), which may be missing or have errors. This
incomplete or noisy data can lead to data bias. To solve the noisy
data problems, Wang et al. [ 76] implemented natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) pre-processing techniques to modify the training data.
Specifically, in a crowdtesting recommendation (e.g., recommending
software testing tasks to professionals), they first perform standard
word segmentation for each document. Then, they remove stop words
and apply synonym substitution to reduce noise. In addition, they
construct a descriptive term list and perform term filtering for each
document. Similarly, Sachdeva et al. [ 75] use a similar NLP approach
as Wang et al. In addition to handling noisy data, some works focus
on missing data. Collaborative filtering-based recommenders typically
model user preferences as a user–item rating matrix. Since it is not
possible for the user to interact with all the items. The rating matrix is
thus high-dimensional and sparse (HiDS), with many missing data rep-
resenting the user’s unobserved preferences. Some works [77,78] apply
a latent factor-based model, which provides a good job of handling the
high-dimensional and sparse (HiDS) matrices, to process missing data.
3.2. In-processing methods for fair recommender systems
Currently, most recommender systems (e.g., collaborative filtering
methods [96]) are devised to extract user preferences by learning the
correlation in the training data [ 102]. However, people potentially
suffer from unfairness services when using these correlation-oriented
recommender systems, such as Simpson’s paradox [ 128], popularity
bias [97], user-oriented bias [ 105], cold-start bias [ 79], to name only
a few. In addition to removing bias via pre-processing methods, many
works design fairness-aware methods to alleviate or even eliminate un-
fairness during model training of recommender systems. In-processing
fairness-aware methods aim to learn bias-free models. In this section,
we classify these works into five categories including regularization-
based methods, casual-inference-based methods, adversarial-learning
based, reinforcement-learning-based methods, ranking methods, and
others.
3.2.1. Regularization and consternation for fairness
To alleviate unfairness in recommender systems, regularization pe-
nalizes the predicted recommendation score in accordance with the
fairness evaluation [ 34]. Regularization terms are widely used in var-
ious recommendation scenarios to reduce bias, such as user-oriented
bias [79], group bias [ 81], exposure bias [ 82], popularity bias [ 84],
etc.
In general, a regularization term is usually regarded as an additional
loss focusing on promoting fairness. The term is added to the main loss,
which is mainly responsible for improving the recommendation perfor-
mance. Specifically, the total loss used for recommendation training is
the sum of the performance loss and the regularization term:
 = 𝑝𝑒𝑟(𝐮, 𝐯) + 𝑟𝑒𝑔(𝜽), (2)
where 𝐿 is the total loss for training, 𝐿𝑝𝑒𝑟(⋅) is the loss for optimizing
the recommendation performance, 𝐿𝑟𝑒𝑔(⋅) is a customized loss function,
and 𝜃 refers to all possible parameters related to fairness evaluation.
Fig. 4 shows a general framework for regularization-based fairness-
aware methods. According to the composition of the regularization
term, we can divide the regularization into three categories, including
norm-based regularization terms, matrix-based regularization terms,
and pair-wise regularization terms.
Norm-based Regularization. The norm calculates the distance
between raw features and generated embeddings. It is used to evaluate
the deviation of the model of learnable recommender systems. Burke
et al. [ 88] propose the possibility of using 𝑙1 norm, and 𝑙2 norm as

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
8
D. Jin et al.
Fig. 5. A causal graph is a directed acyclic graph, wherein each node stands for a random variable, and the directed edges indicate causal relationships. In a recommender system,
the recommendation process can be briefly described as calculating the matching score 𝑟 between user 𝑢 and item 𝑣, to predict the recommendation score 𝑌 . As shown in (a),
where 𝑢 is the user’s representation, 𝑣 is the item’s representation, ℎ represents the user’s history, and 𝑦 is the prediction score. 𝑢 → 𝑟 denotes that 𝑢 is an inducement of 𝑟, and
𝑅 has been effected by a direct causal from 𝑢. Similarly, there is no arrow between 𝑢 and 𝑦, indicating that 𝑢 has no direct causal relationship with 𝑦. The popularity bias, a
prevalent form of unfairness in existing recommender systems, results from users repeatedly clicking recommended items and then recommender systems always advocating for
these items. As shown in (b), the history ℎ influences 𝑢 and 𝑣, which determine 𝑟. (c) shows a method to decrease the effect of ℎ on 𝑢 and 𝑣.
regularization terms. Among multi-sided unfairness issues, user neigh-
borhoods can constrain deviance in their opinion. The regularization
term can be described as:
𝑟𝑒𝑔 = 𝜆1‖𝑊 ‖1 + 𝜆2
2 ‖𝑊 ‖2 + 𝜆3
2
𝑛∑
𝑖
(𝑏𝑖)2, (3)
where 𝑊 is a user–user weight matrix, ‖ ⋅ ‖1 is 𝑙1 norm, ‖ ⋅ ‖2 is 𝑙2 norm,
and 𝑏𝑖 is a neighborhood balance regularization for reducing the prob-
ability of user neighborhoods forming. 𝑏𝑖 is the squared difference be-
tween the weights of the protected users versus the unprotected users.
Protected users are usually including sensitive attributes, and unpro-
tected users do not have sensitive attributes. The works [87,93] employ
similar techniques to alleviate group unfairness. Hu et al. [ 86] use the
𝑙2 norm of user embeddings and item embeddings as a regularization
term.
Matrix-based Regularization. Some regularization terms are in
the form of matrices. Abdollahpouri et al. [ 85] introduce a matrix-
based regularization LapDQ to reduce the popularity bias. The LapDQ
regularizer is defined as :
𝑟𝑒𝑔 = 𝑡𝑟(𝑉 𝑇 𝐿𝐷𝑉 ), (4)
where 𝑉 is the item embedding matrix, 𝑡𝑟(⋅) is the trace function, and
𝐿𝐷 is the Laplacian of the dissimilarity matrix 𝐷. Wasilewski et al. [83]
and Edizel et al. [ 89] also use this type of regularizer for ranking
unfairness and user bias.
Correlation-based Regularization. This type of method mainly
exploits correlation to reduce bias. Beutel et al. [ 81] propose a
correlation-based pair-wise regularization term to balance the clicked
and unclicked item, which is defined as:
𝑟𝑒𝑔 = |𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝐴, 𝐵)|, (5)
where 𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟(⋅) calculates the absolute correlation of two random vari-
ables, 𝐴 and 𝐵 are two random variables. The specific meaning of
𝐴 in this work is the residuals between clicked and unclicked items.
Variable 𝐵 means the correlation between group users of the clicked
items. The model is penalized if it predicts that one group clicked on
an item more than the other group did. Prost et al. [ 80] propose a
MinDiff formulation based on the above method. MinDiff minimizes
the correlation of predicted probability distribution and the distribution
between the clicked items and unclicked items.
Others. To further eliminate data bias in the model training, Wu
et al. [ 91] propose an orthogonality regularization to orthogonalize
the unbiased user embeddings to the biased user embeddings. It thus
distinguishes between embeddings that are unbiased and those that are
biased. For each user 𝑢, the orthogonality regularization can be defined
as:
𝑟𝑒𝑔(𝑢𝑏, 𝑢𝑑 ) = | 𝐮𝑏 ⋅ 𝐮𝑑
‖𝐮𝑏‖⋅ ∥ 𝐮𝑑 ∥ |, (6)
where 𝐮𝑏 and 𝐮𝑑 are the bias-aware and bias-free embeddings, re-
spectively. For group fairness, Boratto et al. [ 92] customized a special
regularization term to reduce the sensitive attribute in group fairness.
𝑟𝑒𝑔 = (
∑𝑛
𝑖 𝑓 (𝑢, 𝑣) ⋅ (𝑣)
∑𝑛
𝑖 𝑓 (𝑢, 𝑣) − 𝐶)2, (7)
where (𝑣) represents the percentage of users who have interacted with
item 𝑣, 𝐶 represents the proportion of interactions between groups
with sensitive attributes and a certain type of item in all interactions.
This regularized optimization implies that the model is penalized if the
difference between correlation and contribution of the population is
significant. Zhu et al. [64] use Kullback–Leibler Divergence to normal-
ize user prediction scores to a normal distribution, reducing the ranking
unfairness in model training.
3.2.2. Causal inference for fairness
The causal inference in artificial intelligence explores the causal
relationships between variables, i.e., how one variable determines
another variable. In this survey, causal inference for fairness represent
methods (e.g. inverse propensity score [ 95,129]) that trace to the
source of bias and then mitigate unfairness through causal infer-
ence [98,104,106]. As shown in Fig. 5 , causal graphs, which visually
represent causal relationships between variables in a recommender
system, are used to analyze the causes of unfairness. In this section,
based on the usage of causal graphs, we categorize current causal in-
ference methods for fairness into inverse propensity scoring, backdoor
adjustment, and counterfactual inference.
Inverse Propensity Score. By analyzing the causes of bias in the
causal graph, the inverse propensity score (IPS) reweights samples in
order to reduce the influences of biased samples, without changing
the causal relationship between variables [ 94]. In Fig. 5 (b), for in-
stance, the confounding variable ℎ affects both 𝑢 and 𝑖, the probability
distribution ̂𝑃 𝑟(ℎ, 𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑟) in this figure can be expressed as
̂𝑃 𝑟(ℎ, 𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑟) = 𝑃 𝑟(𝑟|𝑢, 𝑣, ℎ)𝑃 𝑟(𝑢|ℎ)𝑃 𝑟(𝑣|ℎ), (8)
while in the absence of the confounding variable (i.e., Fig. 5 (c)), the
distribution is:
𝑃 𝑟(ℎ, 𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑟) = 𝑃 𝑟(𝑟|𝑢, 𝑣, ℎ)𝑃 𝑟(𝑢)𝑃 𝑟(𝑖)𝑃 𝑟(ℎ). (9)
To remove the bias brought by the confounding variableℎ, IPS methods
expect ̂𝑃 𝑟(ℎ, 𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑟) = 𝑃 𝑟(ℎ, 𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑟), which can be achieved through
multiplying ̂𝑃 𝑟(ℎ, 𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑟) by a propensity weight, i.e.,
𝑃 𝑟(ℎ, 𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑟) = 𝑃 𝑟(ℎ)
𝑃 𝑟(𝑢|ℎ)𝑃 𝑟(𝑣|ℎ)
̂𝑃 𝑟(ℎ, 𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑟). (10)
Recently, some methods using IPS have been studied to conduct
debiasing. A propensity framework proposed by [95] makes propensity
estimations for improving exposure fairness in implicit feedback sce-
narios. Xiao et al. [129] fuse a deep variational information bottleneck
approach with a propensity score to develop an unbiased learning

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
9
D. Jin et al.
Fig. 6. Adversarial-learning-based fairness-aware methods. The adversarial-learning-based methods first use a generator and a sensitive attribute filter to remove sensitive
information, resulting in embeddings without sensitive information, which are used for recommendation predictions. The corresponding sensitive attributes are predicted by
the discriminator from the filtered embeddings. The generator and the discriminator engage in a max–min game.
algorithm. Since user preferences might drastically change over time,
Huang et al. [ 99] exploit a dynamic inverse propensity score for debi-
asing dynamic popularity biases. To address user behavior bias, Wang
et al. [101] use unbiased data to introduce propensity scores into biased
training of recommender systems. Another recent work [130] analyzes
the data bias mechanism in the sequential recommendation and re-
weights the training parameters to reduce bias using inverse propensity
scores.
Backdoor Adjustment. Unlike the reweighting operation in IPS
methods, backdoor adjustment achieves fairness by blocking off relation-
ships that lead to biases. When removing confounding factors, backdoor
adjustment methods require the causal relationship between variables
satisfies the backdoor criterion. Here, the variable set 𝑍 satisfies the
backdoor criterion on a causal relationship 𝑢 → 𝑣 in the causal graph,
indicating 𝑍 satisfies (1) there is no descendant node of 𝑢 in 𝑍, and
(2) Every path between 𝑢 and 𝑣 that leads to 𝑢 is blocked by 𝑍. For
example, as shown in Fig. 5(c), the history 𝐻 affects the representation
of 𝑢 and 𝑣. To block the influence of ℎ on 𝑢 and 𝑣, backdoor adjustment
methods employ a 𝑑𝑜 operation in cutting off the edge of ℎ → 𝑢 and
the edge of ℎ → 𝑣, which can be formulated as 𝑃 𝑟(𝑦|𝑑𝑜(𝑢), 𝑑𝑜(𝑣)) =
𝑃 𝑟(𝑦|𝑢, 𝑣).
Although the backdoor adjustment is effective in removing unfair-
ness, it faces efficiency challenges resulting from an unlimited sample
space of confounding factors. To this end, Wang et al. [ 131] intro-
duce DecRS, a model that uses data approximation and KL diver-
gence to adjust the backdoor criterion. To lessen document-level label
bias in text-contained recommender systems, DeSCoVeR [ 107] uses
causal backdoor adjustment and sentence-level keyword bias elimina-
tion techniques in a semantic context. An inference model involving
popularity-bias deconfounding and adjusting (PDA) is proposed by
Zhang et al. [ 97] as a new inference approach. It employs backdoor
adjustment during model training to eliminate confusion caused by
popularity bias.
Counterfactual Inference. Counterfactual inference methods for
fairness construct a counterfactual causal graph [ 98] based on the real
causal graph through some fairness-concerning actions (e.g., changing
the values of some sensitive attributes like gender, age, race [ 20,21]).
Recommender systems are fair and unbiased (i.e., counterfactual fair-
ness in Section 2) if the recommendation results in the real world and
the counterfactual world are the same. The intuition of counterfactual
inference methods can be understood as ‘‘if a fairness-concerning action
(e.g., modifying the value of gender) cannot change recommendation
results, then results from the recommender systems are not affected
by the action-object (e.g., gender)’’. A representative counterfactual
inference method for fairness is the framework called MACR [ 98],
which is proposed to mitigate popularity bias. MACR assumes that the
recommendation interaction matrix 𝐼𝑢𝑣 is affected by user 𝑢, item 𝑣, and
the user–item matching ranking score ̂ 𝑦𝑟, i.e., 𝑦𝑢𝑣 = ̂ 𝑦𝑟 ∗ 𝜎( ̂ 𝑦𝑣) ∗ 𝜎( ̂ 𝑦𝑢),
̂ 𝑦𝑣 indicates the influence from item popularity, and ̂ 𝑦𝑢 represents the
extent of the user 𝑢 interact with items. The higher value of the ̂ 𝑦𝑢,
the more likely the user is affected by the popularity of the item.
Through counterfactual inference, the causal graph of the real world
is transformed into the causal graph of the counterfactual world. The
causal relation 𝐼 → 𝑌 is removed by the following formula to alleviate
the item popularity bias problem:
̂ 𝑦𝑟 ∗ 𝜎( ̂ 𝑦𝑖) ∗ 𝜎( ̂ 𝑦𝑢) − 𝑐 ∗ 𝜎( ̂ 𝑦𝑖) ∗ 𝜎( ̂ 𝑦𝑢), (11)
here the hyperparameter 𝑐 controls the influence of user and item
properties on the prediction result. The inference can be interpreted
logically as a ranking adjustment based on ̂ 𝑦𝑢𝑖.
FairTED [100] creates counterfactual samples of sensitive attributes
to make sure that the speaker’s sensitive attribute (i.e., gender) cannot
influence the TED talk quality prediction. Specifically, when generating
counterfactual samples, the score of presentations with female speakers
are assigned as the score of presentations with the same contents
and male speakers. These counterfactual samples are added into the
training dataset to develop recommender systems with counterfactual
fairness on gender. To mitigate the popularity bias and improve ex-
plainable fairness, Ge et al. [ 132] propose a framework called CEF,
which uses counterfactual inference (i.e., introducing small changes
in the features) to find the root cause of the model’s bias. In CEF,
the scores of each feature, which are calculated from counterfactual
recommendation results, are regarded as fairness explanations. More-
over, Li et al. [ 104] counterfactually infer that user-sensitive features
should be orthogonal to user embeddings, and make fair personalized
recommendations by removing user-sensitive features. In the music
streaming media recommender system, the user may have a situation
where the music is playing incorrectly. Zhang et al. [ 56] suggest a
counterfactual learning strategy to correct user feedback that has been
incorrectly categorized.
3.2.3. Adversarial learning for fairness
Adversarial learning is a method commonly used in recommender
systems to remove sensitive attributes. An adversarial-learning-based
fairness-aware framework generally consists of a generator that pro-
duces node embeddings and a discriminator that predicts sensitive
features from these generator outputs. By playing a min–max game
with the discriminator and generator, adversarial-learning methods
are able to learn fair representations. Passing a negative gradient by
predicting the sensitive attribute enables the model to fool the dis-
criminator, so that the information content of the sensitive attribute
is continuously reduced. When the discriminator cannot predict the
sensitive feature value, the output of the generator is considered to
be decoupled from the sensitive feature. The general form of loss for
adversarial-learning-based fairness-aware methods can be formulated
as:
 = 𝑝𝑒𝑟(𝑧, 𝑦) + 𝑎𝑑𝑣 (𝑦, 𝑠), (12)
where 𝑧 is a set of the generated representations of the generator, 𝑦 is
a set of predictions, and 𝑠 is a set of the predictions of the discrimi-
nator. Fig. 6 shows a general framework for adversarial-learning-based
fairness-aware methods. Recent work [ 79] is a study addressing cold-
start bias. To swiftly adjust to cold-start new users, it suggests a
comprehensive fair meta-learning framework (CLOVER) to gather a

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
10
D. Jin et al.
Fig. 7. Reinforcement-learning-based fairness-aware methods. A recommender system retains the learned experience in the process of interacting with the environment. When
interacting in the next round, the behavior with the largest positive feedback and the smallest fairness cost will be selected.
general understanding of user preferences. CLOVER establishes that
recommenders with ratings based on these representations will also ful-
fill counterfactual fairness if individual fair adversarial games converge
to optimal solutions. Through adversarial learning, CLOVER improves
the fairness of the cold-start problem in recommender systems. Based
on sensitive attributes, Wu et al. [ 91] craft a bias-aware user em-
bedding, which is specially used to capture the bias. Furthermore, it
also learns a bias-free user embedding, which is only used to encode
attribute-independent information that the user interests. The fairness
of the model is guaranteed by orthogonalizing the two types of embed-
dings. Liu et al. [ 108] propose an adversarial graph neural network
(GNN) to prevent users from being affected by sensitive features of
neighboring users. In particular, they propose two fairness constraints
to address the failure and inefficiency of adversarial classifiers in the
training data. Rus et al. [109] use adversarial learning to mitigate gen-
der bias in word embeddings obtained from recruitment-related text,
which aims to provide unbiased job recommendations to job applicants.
To alleviate multi-sided fairness. Liu et al. [ 133] design explicit and
implicit adversarial fairness discriminators. Explicit discriminators aim
to address biases from a local perspective, while implicit discriminators
focus on addressing biases from a global perspective. The fairness
generator and discriminator are trained adversarially together to miti-
gate bias. In their paper, Wu et al. [ 48] propose a fairness awareness
framework relying on prompts-based bias eliminators in combination
with adversarial training. Li et al. [134] devise a generative adversarial
network (GAN), named FairGAN, designed to generate negative signals
of users to ensure data fairness. These signals enable FairGAN to
complete the best item exposure ranking.
3.2.4. Reinforcement learning for fairness
Recently, some studies take the dynamic interactions among users,
items, and recommender systems into consideration, and model this
feedback loop as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [ 135]. With this
view, reinforcement learning (RL) methods are used in training rec-
ommendation strategies from users’ historical information to learn
their preferences. In this survey, reinforcement learning for fairness in-
dicates methods that introduce fairness-concerning feedback (e.g., dy-
namic fairness) during the training of RL-based recommender systems.
Fig. 7 shows a general framework for reinforcement-learning-based
fairness-aware methods.
Long-term fairness and dynamic fairness are two typical concepts
concerning mitigating time bias (see Section 2), which can be involved
in the training of RL-based recommender systems. Here we introduce
some representative reinforcement learning for fairness methods. Ge
et al. [ 27] majorly focus on the unfairness of item exposure across
groups caused by time bias. According to their opinion, fairness con-
straints ought to change over time. For instance, an item may no longer
be popular at time 𝑡 + 𝑛, but if it is still exposed in accordance with
the fairness requirements from time 𝑡 earlier, the long-term dynamic
changes in fairness are disregarded. To enable the model to dynamically
adjust the recommendation strategy and guarantee that the fairness
requirements are always satisfied with environmental changes, they
propose a fairness-constrained reinforcement learning recommender
system, modeling the recommendation process as a constrained Markov
Decision Process (CMDP). CMDP proposes two dynamic fairness con-
straints for reinforcement learning. The first is the population equality
constraint, which requires equal average exposure for each group of
items. This constraint is enforced at all reinforcement learning iter-
ations. The second is the exact-k fairness constraint, which requires
that the length of protected candidates in each recommendation list
is statistically below a given threshold. In interactive recommender
systems (IRS), Liu et al. [ 136] dynamically maintain the long-term
trade-off between accuracy and fairness by offering a method called
FairRec. Using reinforcement learning, recommendations are generated
by combining user preferences with system fairness in FairRec. In
addition, FairRec introduces a concept called weighted proportional
fairness to ensure the fairness of item exposure.
Moreover, some approaches have proposed employing multi-
objective reinforcement learning to improve fairness. For instance, Ge
et al. [ 110] investigate the Pareto optimal/effective fairness-utility
trade-off problem in the recommendation process. Using multi-objective
reinforcement learning, they suggest creating a fairness-aware recom-
mendation framework (MoFIR), which introduces conditional networks
and modifies the network according to user preferences. Fu et al. [111]
propose a multi-objective MDP-based framework, namely Popcorn, for
eliminating popularity bias in conversational recommender systems.
Popcorn effectively balances recommendation performance and item
popularity through a real-time semantic understanding of user history
to avoid long-tail effects.
3.2.5. Ranking optimization for fairness
Ranking is an important part of the recommendation algorithm. The
recommender system recommends items for a user according to the
ranking of items. Specifically, the ranking algorithm sorts candidate
items according to users’ preference, and generates a ranking list. Top-
scoring candidates receive the most exposure and are ranked first. The
top-𝑘 candidates are usually returned. A learnable recommender system
usually uses a loss function for ranking. Depending on the flaw in the
design, some biases, such as popular bias and exposure bias, can be
amplified in losses with these flaws, which may lead to unfair out-
comes. In this survey, ranking optimization for fairness indicates methods
that reduce unfairness in recommender systems by employing unbiased
loss functions. Fig. 8 shows a general framework for ranking-based
fairness-aware methods.
There are two types of ranking losses commonly used in a learnable
recommender system: point-wise loss and pair-wise loss. A point-wise
loss, such as binary cross-entropy (BCE) [137] and mean squared error
(MSE) [101], minimizes the difference between the calculated recom-
mendation score and the ground truth to capture user preferences for
individual items. Pair-wise loss, such as Bayesian Personalized Ranking
(BPR) [138], maximizes the user preference gap between the observed
items and the unobserved items. The observed items are interacted
with users and the unobserved items have no interaction with users.
The BPR loss is a pair-wise ranking algorithm, that performs pairwise
comparisons of items, and learns the order of relevant pairs from the
comparisons to rank. The BPR loss encourages the observed item’s

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
11
D. Jin et al.
Fig. 8. Ranking-based fairness-aware methods. Such methods use a carefully designed unbiased loss for ranking.
prediction to be higher than the unobserved item’s prediction. The BPR
loss can be summarized as:
𝐵𝑃 𝑅 = −
∑
(𝑢,𝑣1,𝑣2)∈𝐷𝑆
ln 𝜎(𝑦𝑢,𝑣1 − 𝑦𝑢,𝑣2 ), (13)
where 𝑦𝑢,𝑣 is the predicted score, 𝐷𝑆 = {(𝑢, 𝑣1, 𝑣2) ∣ 𝐼𝑢,𝑣1 = 1, 𝐼 𝑢,𝑣2 = 0},
and 𝐼𝑢,𝑣 is the interaction between the user 𝑢 and the item 𝑣. 𝐼𝑢,𝑣 = 1
indicates 𝑣 is an observed item, and vice versa.
It can be seen from the above equation that the BPR loss is affected
by the observed item. Popular items tend to have higher observation
than unpopular items, thus, they have a high exposure probability.
The more items are observed by the user, the higher the exposure for
the user, which leads to popularity bias and exposure bias. Flaws in
the BPR loss cause the popularity bias to be amplified during training.
Therefore, Wan et al. [ 63] propose a cross pairwise ranking loss 𝐿𝐶𝑃 𝑅
for unbiased training:
𝐿𝐶𝑃 𝑅 = −
∑
(𝑢1,𝑢2,𝑣1,𝑣2)∈𝐷𝑐
𝑙𝑛𝜎[ 1
2 (𝑦𝑢1,𝑣1 + 𝑦𝑢2,𝑣2 − 𝑦𝑢1,𝑣2 − 𝑦𝑢2,𝑣1 )], (14)
where 𝐷𝑐 = {( 𝑢1, 𝑢2, 𝑣1, 𝑣2) ∣ 𝐼𝑢1,𝑣1 = 1 , 𝐼𝑢2,𝑣2 = 1 , 𝐼𝑢1,𝑣2 = 0 , 𝐼𝑢2,𝑣1 = 0}
denotes the training data, and 𝐼 is the user–item interaction set. The
CPR loss uses cross pair-wise interactions as training samples. Given
two users and their interacted items, the unobserved data is obtained by
exchanging items for the user. CPR decomposes exposure probabilities
of items into a user-specific, item-specific propensity and user–item
relevance, which are not independent of each other and thus contain
bias. These predicted scores expressed by exposure biases can cancel
the exposure biases each other according to Eq. (14), therefore the CPR
loss is unbiased. There are also ranking methods that analyze the flaws
of BPR loss [ 64,81]. However, these methods achieve unbias ranking
by adding regularization terms, so we will not go into details here.
3.2.6. Others
In addition to the above-mentioned typical methods, there are
also some niche methods to enhance the fairness of recommender
systems. Zhou et al. [ 113] theoretically demonstrate that contrastive
loss can replace the inverse propensity score to reduce exposure bias.
Shen et al. [ 114] learn cross-scenario user interests through an atten-
tion network, and propose a fairness factor to gauge how important
each scenario is. Zheng et al. [ 53] design a context-bias-aware rec-
ommendation model. They use attention networks to infer negative
user preferences and eliminate contextual bias caused by the combined
interaction between multiple items. Li et al. [115] design an end-to-end
model for time-influenced sequential recommendation by weighting the
embeddings to mitigate the unfair distribution of user attributes over
items.
3.3. Post-processing methods for fair recommender systems
From the view of fairness, the recommendation results from target
systems are usually not optimal, since these results potentially do
not take factors concerning fairness (e.g., interactions between items,
manual intentions, and differences in user preferences) into considera-
tion. For enhancing fairness, post-processing methods aim to rearrange
the recommendation results provided by target models, which are
treated as black-box during the rearrangement (i.e., re-ranking), after
the training of recommender systems. Re-ranking methods include
manual-based re-ranking and algorithmic-based re-ranking. Here, we
mainly introduce the re-ranking method that helps to boost the rec-
ommender system fairness, without repeating the manual re-ranking.
Depending on whether or not the manual intervention is required,
current re-ranking methods can be categorized into manual re-ranking
and algorithmic-based re-ranking methods. In this survey, we focus
on the algorithmic-based re-ranking methods and divide them into
non-parametric re-ranking and parametric re-ranking , according to if a
parameter learning process is required to conduct re-ranking. Fig. 9
shows a general framework of re-ranking methods for fair recom-
mender systems.
3.3.1. Non-parametric re-ranking
In this survey, non-parametric re-ranking methods represent learning-
free algorithms to conduct re-ranking concerning fairness. Heuristic
methods used to achieve fairness are generally non-parametric re-
ranking strategies, which treat the re-ranking process as an integer
programming problem. Under specified fairness constraints, the op-
timal re-ranking outcomes are then found through heuristic search
methods. Specifically, given original top- 𝑘 recommendation results for
each user from recommender systems, heuristic methods are designed
to maximize the total preference score with respect to fairness by
rearranging original recommendations, which can be formulated as
arg max
𝐼𝑢𝑣
𝑛∑
𝑢=1
𝑁∑
𝑣=1
𝐼𝑢𝑣𝑆𝑢𝑣,
𝑠.𝑡.𝐶(𝑔1, 𝑔2) < 𝜉,
𝐼𝑢𝑣 ∈ [0, 1],
(15)
where 𝐼𝑢𝑣 is an interaction matrix that reflects whether item 𝑣 should
be recommended to user 𝑢, 𝐶(⋅) represents a fairness constraint func-
tion, 𝑔1 and 𝑔2 are two different groups. The objective function is to
maximize the recommendation score under fairness constraints, which
is composed of user–item matching and user preference. By treating the
optimization as a 0–1 integer programming problem, a series of works
employ heuristic algorithms to conduct re-ranking. Here we present
some representative methods.
To ensure fairness across various groups, Fu et al. [ 139] utilized
a heuristic re-ranking algorithm that constructs bias-constrained ex-
plainable recommendations on knowledge graphs. Similarly to this, Li
et al. [ 15] proposed a similar approach, employing a heuristic-based
method for re-ranking users, aiming to enhance group fairness consid-
ering their attributes. According to Wu et al. [ 118], there is a model
called TFROM, which is designed to enhance exposure fairness for both
users and providers. In this model, the recommendation list’s length is
equated to the capacity of a knapsack, and the items symbolize the ob-
jects within this knapsack. TFROM uses a heuristic search algorithm to
solve the knapsack problem. Zhu et al. [ 62] present a novel re-ranking
framework including a score scaling model, which is used to re-rank
the biased recommendation results. Naghiaei et al. [ 116] convert the
recommendation optimization problem into a 0–1 integer programming

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
12
D. Jin et al.
Fig. 9. The pipeline of re-ranking methods for fair recommender systems. These methods use recommendation lists and fairness constraints to construct integer programming
problem, and use heuristic algorithms or learnable models to re-rank the recommendation lists.
and knapsack problem, and then propose employing greedy algorithms
or solvers (e.g., Gurobi) to perform re-ranking. Moreover, Mansoury
et al. [117] transform the item exposure inequity problem in popularity
into a graph maximum flow problem to conduct re-ranking. Recent
work [ 140] design a two-stage approach to transform the problem
into a max–min problem, using greedy strategies to ensure maximum
exposure for producers and sorting to ensure fairness for each user.
3.3.2. Parametric re-ranking
In this survey, all re-ranking methods that require a learning process
to improve the fairness of recommender systems during the post-
processing stage are called parametric re-ranking methods. Existing
study [62] shows that, compared with non-parametric re-ranking meth-
ods, parametric re-ranking methods own better debiasing ability and
are more competent when enhancing equality opportunity-based fair-
ness. Here we introduce several typical parametric re-ranking meth-
ods. Given the recommendation results from the target systems, Zhu
et al. [62] employ a learnable autoencoder module to enhance fairness
and ensure the rearranged results have the same distribution as the
original recommendations.
4. Datasets and evaluation for fair RSs
In this subsection, we provide a brief overview of the most com-
monly utilized datasets and assessment metrics in the context of
fairness-aware recommender systems.
4.1. Datasets
In this section, we will present several datasets frequently employed
in experiments related to the credibility of recommendation systems.
Due to the complexity of fairness study in recommender systems, one
specific dataset can be applied in addressing different bias issues.
For example, the Amazon Review dataset is used in mitigating user
attribute bias, model weights bias, and popularity bias. It is benefi-
cial to use a variety of datasets to detect unfairness in recommender
systems and evaluate fairness-enhancing methods. Here we summarize
commonly used datasets in Table 2 , demonstrating their basic infor-
mation, and possible scenarios (e.g., exposure bias, and what kind of
recommender systems can be used).
In addition to the datasets mentioned in Table 2 , some other
datasets can also be used to mitigate unfairness. For example, Gowalla
[154], Ctrip [ 118] can be used to solve the Pairwise bias. CIKM and
AliEc can be used to solve the user attribute biases [ 48]. MinD [ 155]
and COCO [ 13] can be used to solve user behavior biases. CiteULike
and XING [ 62] can be used to solve cold-start bias. Clothing, Cell-
Phones [139] are used to solve Group fairness. Ciao [ 98] can be used
to solve Feedback bias.
4.2. Evaluation
Evaluating a fairness-aware recommender system can be measured
in terms of its accuracy and fairness. To avoid bias in recommenda-
tion results, this section presents accuracy metrics that will not harm
fairness first, then metrics for assessing the fairness of recommender
systems.
Accuracy Metrics for Fairness. There are some evaluation metrics
used for evaluating the quality of a model. The common evaluation
metrics are as follows:
• Area Under Curve (AUC) [156] is the region contained within the
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and the coordinate
axis. The maximum possible value of AUC is one. The closer the
AUC is to 1, the higher the authenticity of the detection method;
and vice versa.
• Precision (P) [157] is the proportion of correctly classified positive
examples to all positive examples that are classified, and Preci-
sion@k (P@k) represents the Precision of the top- 𝑘 items in the
list.
• Recall (R) [158] refers to how many of the positive samples are
successfully found by the model. Recall@k indicates the recall of
the first 𝑘 items in the result list.
• Average Precision (AP) [159] calculates the average precision. The
higher the value of AP@K, the more relevant items are present in
the top−𝑘 recommendations and the higher these relevant items
are ranked.
• Normalize Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG@k) [160] provides
different degrees of relevance, ranking the results according to
relevance and weighting them uniformly.
Metrics to Evaluate Fairness. There are some commonly used
metrics for measuring the fairness of recommender systems:
• Gini coefficient is an economic indicator that is used to measure
the income inequality of a country or region [ 28]. It is also often
used to measure the fairness of recommender systems, which
measures the value inequality of a frequency distribution [ 27].
The value of Gini coefficient is between 0 and 1, and smaller
values represent greater fairness. Its definition is:
𝐺𝑖𝑛𝑖 𝑐𝑜𝑒𝑓 𝑓 𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡 = 1
2𝑛2𝑒𝑣
𝑛∑
𝑖=1
𝑛∑
𝑗=1
|𝑒𝑣𝑖 − 𝑒𝑣𝑗 |, (16)
where 𝑛 indicates items’ number, 𝑒𝑣𝑖 represents the exposure fre-
quency of item 𝑣𝑖, and ̄ 𝑒𝑣donates the average of items’ exposure
frequency.
• KL-divergence computes the divergence between two distribu-
tions [161], which can be used to measure various biases. Taking
popularity bias as an example, KL-divergence can measure the
distribution difference between user history records and popu-
larity in recommendation results [20]. The recommendations are
fairer when the value of KL-divergence is lower. The expression
of KL-divergence is
𝐷𝐾𝐿 (𝐷1(𝑣), 𝐷2(𝑣)) =
∑
𝑣∈𝑉
𝐷1(𝑣)𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝐷1(𝑣)
𝐷2(𝑣) , (17)

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
13
D. Jin et al.
Table 2
Summary of the selected datasets. We present the dataset, detailing its cardinality—specifically the number
of users, items, and edges, its applicability to fairness issues, and associated reference relations.
Datasets #Users #Items #Edges Fairness Issues References
Amazon 3,915 2,549 77,328
Exposure Bias [118]
Training Bias [141]
User Bias [64]
Beauty 22,363 12,101 198,502 Exposure Bias [113]
User Bias [139], [15], [134]
Epinion 49,290 139,738 664,828
Exposure Bias [116]
Popularity Bias [142]
User Bias [143]
Lastfm 1,892 17,632 92,834
Exposure Bias [116], [21], [140], [26]
Training Bias [141]
User Bias [127]
MovieLens 943 1,349 99,287
Exposure Bias [116], [26]
Popularity Bias [111], [99]
User Bias [104], [144]
MovieLens 1M 6,040 3,706 1,000,209
Cold-start Bias [62], [79]
Exposure Bias [145], [146], [21]
Time Bias [27], [115]
Training Bias [141]
Popularity Bias [143], [147], [148]
User Bias [64], [131], [142], [149]
Yahoo!R3 5,400 1,000 183,179
Popularity Bias [147], [150], [148]
Training Bias [141]
User Bias [151], [112], [152]
Yelp 25,677 25,815 731,671
Exposure Bias [132]
Popularity Bias [98], [111]
Training Bias [141]
User Bias [64], [142], [153]
where 𝐷1(⋅) refers to a distribution of item 𝑣 and 𝐷2(⋅) refers to a
fair distribution of item 𝑣.
• Difference mainly considers that if the distance between the two
recommendation results is less than the fairness constraint co-
efficient, then the recommendation system is considered to be
fair [15], i.e.,
|𝑦𝑣𝑖 − 𝑦𝑣𝑗 | < 𝜉, (18)
where 𝑦𝑣𝑖 is a recommender system prediction of item 𝑣𝑖, 𝜉
is strictness parameter of fairness requirements. If the predic-
tion score of 𝑣𝑖 and 𝑣𝑗 is smaller than the fairness constraint
coefficient, we consider that the recommender system is fair.
In addition to the above metrics, we can also employ other metrics
to evaluate fairness-aware recommender systems. For example, Lesota
et al. [20] propose measures to account for prevalence bias from the
median, various statistical moments, and measures of similarity that
consider the entire prevalence distribution, including Mean, Median,
Variance, Skew, Kurtosis, Kendall’s 𝜏 rank-order correlation. If a recom-
mender system offers suggestions that suit the preferences of a certain
group of users, but fails to accurately reflect the preferences of another
user group, it can be deemed unfair. An analytical metric called mis-
calibration is used by Abdollahpouri et al. [148] to measure the degree
to which a recommender system responds to the true preferences of
the user. If the Hellinger distance [148] between two distributions
exceeds a threshold, then it is called miscalibration. According to
Fu et al. [111], two measures are used to measure popularity bias
in conversational recommender systems (CRSs): personalized average
recommendation popularity (PARP) and popularity-rank correlation for
users (PRU). Mena-Maldonado et al. [147] present two novel metrics
for describing the relationship between prevalence and relevance dis-
tributions. The article experimentally identifies scenarios for the use of
true-positive metrics or false-positive metrics. Ge et al. [27] propose a
fairness indicator known as the popularity rate, which represents the
proportion of popular items in a recommended list in relation to the
total number of recommended items.
5. Industrial applications of fair RSs
This session focuses primarily on the application of fairness-aware
recommender systems to real-world situations. We introduce the impact
of fairness-aware recommender systems on life from application sce-
narios such as e-commerce and finance. Table 3 highlights real-world
applications of fair recommender systems.
5.1. Fairness in E-commerce recommendations
There are many applications of the fair correction recommenda-
tion system in the area of e-commerce. To address the uneven data
distribution across scenarios and the systematic bias of disadvantaged
items that emerge in the re-ranking phase, Shen et al. [114] have
introduced a solution to the aforementioned challenges in the form of a
Scenario-Aware Ranking Network (SAR-Net). The SAR-Net is designed
to capture a user’s interests across various scenarios using two tailored
attention modules. By assessing the importance of individual samples
and adjusting predictions accordingly, the SAR-Net aims to mitigate
data bias arising from human intervention. Wu et al. [162] introduce
that in e-commerce websites such as Amazon and JD.com, a feeds-based
recommendation has become a mainstream recommendation mode,
and users can scroll down to view more products recommended by

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
14
D. Jin et al.
Table 3
Industrial applications of fairness-aware recommender systems. We delineate the applications by outlining their
respective domains of existence, the prevalent bias that they grapple with, and the methodological approaches they
adopt to counteract these biases.
Domains Sub-domains Bias Methods Reference
E-commerce Exposure Bias Ranking [114]
User Bias Re-ranking [162]
Education Exposure Bias Re-ranking [163], [164]
Popularity Bias Ranking [165]
Social activities
Job
recommendation
Exposure Bias Counterfactual learning [59]
User Bias Adversarial learning [109]
News
recommendation
User Bias Regularization [155]
User Bias Adversarial learning [53]
Popularity Bias Adversarial learning [166]
Streaming media
recommendation
Popularity Bias Ranking [167]
Time Bias Backdoor adjustment [168]
Popularity Bias Re-ranking [123]
User Bias Adversarial learning [169]
feeds. In the rolling feeds recommendation, four grids with pictures are
usually played on the same mobile phone screen, and the similarity
of the four products will affect the user’s judgment, thus introducing
bias. The article considers this phenomenon to be a contextual bias. The
authors propose an unbiased counterfactual learning method to elimi-
nate contextual bias. The proposed method is applied to a real-world
e-commerce website, JD.com.
5.2. Fairness in education recommendations
Users are hoped to receive an education without bias in a fair
education recommender system. Gómez et al. [163] believe that the
geographic location of teachers has a strong impact on visibility and
exposure. The re-ranking approach overcomes these phenomena by
ensuring that each group receives the exposure expected, thereby en-
suring that different providers are treated fairly. Boratto et al. [165]
explore how recommender systems in the context of popularity-biased
massively open online courses. A comparison is made of existing al-
gorithms relating to the popularity of courses, catalog coverage, and
popularity of course categories. Marras et al. [164] provide a formal
definition of the online education recommendation principle and pro-
pose a novel re-ranking method that is conscious of fairness, in an
effort to strike a balance between personalization and recommendation
opportunities.
5.3. Fairness in social activities
5.3.1. Job recommendations
Job recommendation systems match job seekers with job infor-
mation, and recommend job listings that meet job seekers’ wishes,
or lists of talented candidates that meet the requirements of the re-
cruiter [170]. However, user-sensitive attributes may cause discrimi-
nation for users in job recommender systems and reduce users’ trust in
them. Several researches are devoted to mitigating discrimination and
improving the fairness of job recommendation systems. Chen et al. [59]
find that click-through rates for job advertisements decreased over
time. Thus, they adopt the inverse propensity weighting method and
customize a new loss function to rank the deviation of ad exposure
position. In a recent paper, Rus et al. [109] demonstrate that gender
bias can be removed from 12 million job openings and 0.9 million
resumes through the use of a generative adversarial network, providing
fair job recommendations to mitigate the pay gaps between different
genders.
5.3.2. News recommendations
News recommendation systems mainly recommend news to users
on digital news sites. Qi et al. [155] present ProFairRec, a news recom-
mendation framework that prioritizes provider fairness. By integrating
adversarial learning, the framework ensures that representations of
fair news from providers remain unbiased during the recommenda-
tion process. They suggest the use of orthogonal regularization of
provider-fair and biased representations to decrease the bias associated
with news providers. Zheng et al. [53] argue that the contextual bias
among news items may not be fully captured due to interactions
among multiple items. To address this, they propose a novel context-
bias-aware recommendation model aimed at eliminating context bias
and achieving fairness in recommendations. Qi et al. [166] propose
user encoders with popularity awareness to eliminate popularity bias
from user behavior and achieve accurate interest modeling. In news
recommendation, several recommender systems utilize multiple heads
to capture correlations between news items based on representations
from the news that users view. Yi et al. [171] argue that news click
behavior may also be biased by the way news is presented on on-
line platforms. So this paper proposes a bias-aware personalized news
recommendation approach called DebiasRec. Debiasrec trains a biased
news recommendation model from biased click behavior and inferring
the biased interests of users from the clicked news articles.
5.3.3. Streaming media recommendations
Streaming media recommendation systems include music recom-
mendation, video recommendation, etc. As a means of increasing trans-
parency and fairness to artists in music recommendation systems, Kird-
emir et al. [167] find the presence of video recommendations in
YouTube’s structural and systematic biases in YouTube. By employing
a graphical probabilistic approach, this study evaluates the structural
properties of video recommendations. To eliminate undesired temporal
bias, Zhan et al. [168] propose a duration-fault quantization (D2Q)-
based watch-time prediction framework that allows for industrial pro-
duction systems for scaling. The framework has been implemented
within the Kuaishou App, a commercial video streaming platform.
This has resulted in a substantial enhancement in predicting real-
time video viewing time, thereby significantly improving real-time
video consumption. A study by Shakespeare et al. [172] examines
whether state-of-the-art collaborative filtering algorithms exacerbate or
ameliorate artist gender biases. This work designs two methods for
determining why differences are attributed to changes in the distri-
bution of inputs based on gender and user preferences. Melchiorre
et al. [173] construct a dataset comprising information about the
music consumption habits and personality traits of Twitter users. This

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
15
D. Jin et al.
Table 4
Connections between Fair-aware RSs to Trustworthy RSs. We present various categories of fairness recommendation methodologies associated
with trustworthiness properties, along with a succinct summary of their content.
Trustworthiness Methods for Fair RSs Ref. Sketches
Explainability
Causal inference [174] Causal analysis on the relationship between users’ past and future behaviors.
[132] An explainable weighting method is employed to rank counterfactual
recommendation outcomes effectively.
[175] A counterfactual analysis and explanation are provided to bolster
the effectiveness of explanations and promote fairness in the process.
[139] Presenting a fairness-constrained method that utilizes heuristic re-ranking to
address the issue of unfairness recommendations based on knowledge graphs.
Robustness
Data modification [19] Constructing antidote datasets to improve the fairness and robustness of
recommender systems.
Causal inference [176] Utilizing an inverse propensity score helps eliminate polarity bias in group
recommendations, ensuring a more robustness and fairness outcome.
Regularization [177] Improving robustness and control fairness through L2 regularization loss.
Privacy Causal inference [79] Training models on risk-free, user-approved privacy data.
Others [21] Preventing the exposure of sensitive information within the learned
embeddings.
Discrimination Re-ranking [13] Utilizing re-ranking methods helps minimize discrimination,
promoting fairness and equal representation in the results.
Diversity Re-ranking [26] Transforming the issue into a maximum flow problem to improve the
diversity.
Regularization [178] Incorporating regularization terms can enhance fairness and diversity,
ensuring a more balanced and inclusive outcome.
work analyzes the recommendation algorithms SLIM and EASE Mult-
VAE. Their research results reveal notable differences in performance
between user groups scoring high and low on certain personality traits.
The recent work [123] proposes a fairness-conscious re-ranking frame-
work for quantifying and mitigating algorithmic bias due to data bias.
In an online A/B test of representative rankings of LinkedIn Talent
Search or recommendations, the authors propose a strategy aimed at
distributing ranking outcomes according to one or more safeguarded
attributes, with the goal of achieving fairness principles like equal
opportunity and population parity. This large-scale deployment of a
framework that deploys LinkedIn Recruiter to ensure fairness in the
recruitment space without impacting business metrics has the poten-
tial to positively impact over 630 million LinkedIn members. Wu
et al. [169] use adversarial learning to reduce bias arising from user-
sensitive attributes. Furthermore, they utilize KL divergence to capture
less candidate-aware bias.
6. Connections with other trustworthy dimensions
Recommendation systems are one of the most crucial parts of the
lives of people today. However, some recommendations lack moral
basis and restraints, which undermines user confidence and possibly
transgresses the law. A crisis of trust in the recommendation system can
be sparked by a significant volume of biased training data or biased
recommendation algorithms. Thus, it is uttermost important to have
trustworthy recommender systems. Ideally, a trustworthy recommender
system should be open and transparent, and its methods for obtaining
results should be explainable. The trustworthiness of a recommender
system is mainly evaluated based on four ethical principles, including
explainability, robustness, privacy, and fairness. Here we introduce
other ethical principles beyond fairness.
• Explainability. Explainability requires that the decisions of the
recommender system should be understandable by people. Specif-
ically, it requires that the decision-making process, and input and
output relationships of recommender systems should be logically
explained. However, most of the current recommendation models
operate in the form of ‘‘black boxes’’, sometimes it is not always
possible to explain why a recommender system produces a par-
ticular output or decision, which can lead to users’ distrust of
recommendation models. Therefore, explainability is crucial for
building user trust in recommender systems.
• Robustness. The robustness of recommender systems refers to
their ability to continue to operate normally when threatened or
attacked. It requires the recommender system to be safe, reliable,
and robust enough to handle errors or inconsistencies in all life cy-
cle stages of the recommender system. Recommendation systems
generally rely on user history records to build algorithm models.
User history records contain a lot of junk data generated by
systems and humans, which may lead to a decrease in the fairness
and accuracy of the model. Thus, a trustworthy recommendation
algorithm must be robust.
• Privacy. Personal data collected by a recommender system
should be safe and able to protect personal privacy. Private
data and privacy must be protected throughout the life cycle
of the recommender system. Private data encompasses both the
information shared by the user and the information derived from
the user’s interactions with the system. A trustworthy recommen-
dation system should take responsibility for preventing unlawful
and unfair discrimination against users as a result of the collected
data.
A recommender system may contain a variety of untrustworthy
issues, and biases that cause unfairness may also cause other untrust-
worthiness. For example, privacy and robustness issues caused by data
bias (age and gender). The issue of fairness may arise simultaneously
with other trustworthy issues in a recommender system. We are con-
cerned with the fairness of the recommender system and introduce
other trustworthy ethical principles based on the fairness content.
We describe the connection between fairness and each trustworthy
property below. Table 4 outlines the connections between fairness and
other trustworthiness properties.
6.1. Connections with explainability
Some methods for mitigating fairness issues can also be added to
the explainability of models. For example, methods based on causal
inference analyze the causes of bias and provide explanations for the
decision-making process of recommendation models. Xu et al. [174]
argue that the explainability of recommender systems involves causal

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
16
D. Jin et al.
Table 5
Future directions for fairness-aware recommender systems. We categorize future directions by segmenting them into distinct trajectories,
elucidating the current deficiencies inherent in the fairness-aware RSs, the potential challenges to be encountered, and elucidating the advantages
of resolving these issues.
Directions Current shortcomings Future challenges Challenges-solving benefits
Concepts Various fairness concepts
exhibit both distinctions and
interconnected characteristics.
Create customized fairness
concepts for diverse
recommendation scenarios.
Standardize industry concepts
while promoting fairness in
diverse scenarios.
Frameworks There is not a one-size-fits-all
framework for addressing
fairness concerns.
Apply suitable fairness
methods to specific fairness
issues.
Ensuring the most effective
solutions are applied.
Trade-off Balancing fairness can
sometimes affect accuracy,
causing imperfect outcomes.
Finding a balance between
fairness and recommendation
performance.
Ensuring optimal results while
promoting equitable treatment
for all users.
Trustworthiness Fairness-trustworthiness
interactions are underexplored
in current researches.
Explore the interaction rules
between fairness and
trustworthiness.
Foster trustworthy properties in
fairness RSs to increase
trustworthiness.
analysis between the previous and future behaviors of users, which is
bound to answer counterfactual questions. An example of the question
can be ‘‘What would happen if a different set of items were purchased’’.
Counterfactual inference provides a fair framework for recommender
systems, where the constructed counterfactual world explains why the
model makes the output decisions. Therefore, counterfactual reasoning
can simultaneously promote the explainability and fairness of recom-
mender systems. Ge et al. [132] propose a counterfactual explainable
fairness framework for group fairness. Specifically, they propose an
explainable weighting method to rank the counterfactual recommen-
dation results, which can be seen as an explanation for the final
recommendation. Cornacchia et al. [175] propose a model that fuses
natural language processing and counterfactual inferencing to provide
recommendations for the loans domain. This model provides users with
fairness and transparent advice. The path-based method is a common
method to make improvements to recommender systems’ explainabil-
ity. Fu et al. [139] make improvements on user–item path distribution
and fairness of the recommender system by designing a fairness-aware
ranking algorithm.
6.2. Connections with robustness
Robustness can be reflected in the ability to defense attacks on data
and models. Data bias cause unfair, it is also vulnerable to attack, which
makes the model less robust. Fang et al. [19] propose to construct
antidote data that mimics the rating behavior of users to mitigate
data bias. These data are not considered anomalous data for attacking,
thus it can make an improvement on the model’s robustness. The
same method also be adopted by Rastegarpanah et al. [87]. Dokoupil
et al. [176] argue that recommender systems should utilize as much
unbiased data as possible, whereas real-world training data is biased. In
this case, to make the recommender system robust, they use an inverse
propensity score to remove polarity bias in group recommendations.
As a result, the fairness of group recommendations has been improved.
Zhu et al. [177] design a local model and a global model to improve
robustness and control fairness through l2 regularization loss. They
improve model robustness and fairness through continuous gradient
optimization.
6.3. Connections with privacy
Training data in recommender systems may contain some user-
sensitive attributes that may be considered private by users. Even if the
user’s sensitive data is well protected, privacy leakage may occur dur-
ing the interaction with the recommender system. The leaked private
information can be maliciously obtained by other users, which brings
data bias to the recommendation system and causes unfairness. Some
works [51,79] establish a connection between fairness and privacy.
Recommender systems may be unfair if users’ private information is
used extensively for personalization and when protected private data
attributes like gender and ethnicity are misused. A bipartite graph is
typically created organically by users and items in recommender sys-
tems. Directly abusing some user–item representations will nevertheless
cause the leakage of user-sensitive information, even if user–item in-
teractions do not contain any user-sensitive data. This is because user
behavior and attributes are found to be correlated in social theory.
For example, a person’s privacy (such as his gender) can be inferred
from his actions. Each user’s embedding has a hidden connection to
the behavior of similar users and users who have the same items, in
addition to being tied to the user’s behavior.
Similarly, Wu et al. [21] make an effort to keep user privacy
and sensitive information hidden from the recommender system. They
transform the fairness-aware recommendation problem into learning
fair user and item representations, and provide a GNN method (FairGo)
to avoid any sensitive information from being revealed from the learned
embeddings. To make a fair recommendation and prevent the spread
of high-level sensitive information, FairGo designs an ego network,
which is user-centric and links the purchased products of the user
and the item. Fairgo designs an aggregation algorithm that prevents
high-order information propagation in the ego network and achieves
representation fairness. The ego network embedding and user–item
embedding are mapped into the same space after learning the embed-
ding. In this space, filters of sensitive information are used for filtering,
and finally, fairness training is performed through graph adversarial
learning. In a cold-start situation, where user–item interaction data
is lacking, recommender systems leverage the data trained from non-
cold-start scenarios as the proxy for cold-start user–item information.
However, this approach can leak the privacy of non-cold-started user–
items. Wei et al. [79] suggest training risk-free, user-approved private
data, and then making privacy-preserving fair recommendations to
cold-start users.
6.4. Connections with others
Discrimination occurs in an untrustworthy recommender system.
Mansoury et al. [179] propose three different user profile features, and
analyze the possible connection between these features and the differ-
ent behaviors of the recommender system for different genders. They
introduce the unfairness of the recommender system caused by gender
discrimination, and find that women get less accurate recommendations
than males based on their experiments. This phenomenon indicates that
the recommendation algorithm is unfair to different genders.
An ethical recommendation system cannot discriminate against vul-
nerable groups. In addition to protecting user privacy from the stand-
point of ethical and moral norms, we also need to consider the require-
ments of relatively underprivileged groups. A number of measures are
suggested by Leonhardt et al. [180] as ways to quantify the influence

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
17
D. Jin et al.
Table 6
A comprehensive overview of recommender systems that are both fairness-aware and incorporate trustworthiness features. The horizontal axis
represents the recommendation methods promoting fairness, while the vertical axis corresponds to the trustworthiness features. The blank
areas indicate an absence of related research in those particular domains. These unexplored areas also present opportunities for future research
directions.
Explainability [174], [132] [139]
Robustness [19], [87] [177] [176]
Privacy [21] [79] [51]
Others [178] [13], [26]
Pre-processing
methods
Regularization Causal
inference
Adversarial
learning
Reinforcement
learning
Ranking Post-processing
methods
of fairness-aware pre-processing techniques on user prejudice. A re-
ranking method is developed by Gomez et al. [13] in order to reduce
bias caused by the discrimination against teachers’ geographic loca-
tion. By using black feminist and critical race theory, Schelenz [181]
attempts to lessen the unfairness of the user’s political and social
environment.
In addition to the problem of discrimination, contemporary recom-
mender systems use big data to conduct in-depth and detailed mining
of users’ historical behaviors, personal characteristics, and other data.
They take the learned user’s preference as the main standard and
provide precise ‘‘Act According to Actual Circumstances’’ recommen-
dations for the user. While these recommender systems excessively
collect users’ private data, they limit the possibility of ordinary people
exploring a variety of new fields.
Another form of fairness that some studies suggest is diversity [181].
Diversity can alleviate the ethical issues caused by the precise rec-
ommendation of recommender systems. Mansoury et al. [26] solve
the problem of unfairness by transforming it into a maximum flow
problem, which improves the overall diversity and fair distribution of
recommended items. Sacharidis et al. [178] propose a regularization
for social recommendations that allows friends to be similar. However,
within a community, it generally forces members to be more diverse,
which results in fairer recommendations.
7. Future directions
In recent years, attention from the academy and industry communi-
ties has been paid to improving fair recommender systems. However,
thoroughly building fair recommender systems that can be trusted
still faces the following challenges. Table 5 outlines current works’
shortcomings, unresolved issues, and potential benefits of resolving
them.
Concepts for fairness. In different recommendation scenarios, the
fairness goals that people pursue are also different. For example, in a
recommender system with multiple stakeholders, the goal of fairness is
to balance the interests of multiple stakeholders. However, the goal of
fairness in a time-aware job recommender system is to balance exposure
frequency with old and new job information [59]. The concepts of
fairness in different scenarios have both mutually inclusive and differ-
ent parts. For example, both long-term fairness and dynamic fairness
are fairness affected by time. A statically fair recommender system
may include individual fairness and group fairness. Therefore, it is
difficult to have a unified and accurate concept to define the fairness of
recommender systems. Obtaining a common concept for different defi-
nitions of fairness is an important challenge. In addition, there may be
some different fairness issues in a recommendation scenario, and these
fairness issues may be conflicting. A potentially promising approach
is to consider the prioritization of fairness issues in a recommender
system. Few works consider the importance of fairness issues. This will
also be an important challenge in the future.
General frameworks for fairness. The application scenarios of
fair-
ness-aware recommender systems are broad, including education, soci-
ety, health care, et al. However, each recommendation scenario has dif-
ferent fairness-aware recommendation methods, such as regularization-
based methods and re-ranking methods. At present, there is no work to
analyze which type of fairness method is applicable to a certain type
of fairness issue from the perspective of recommendation scenarios.
In addition, due to the diversity of fairness issues, building a unified
recommendation framework to solve all fairness issues can simplify
the analysis of various fairness issues and also can be quickly applied
to new scenarios and unknown fairness issues. There is no work yet
to solve the above problem. We look forward to building a general
recommendation framework to address different fairness issues in the
future.
Trade-off between fairness and performance of RSs. As a means
of ensuring the fairness of the recommender system, a system needs
to reduce the bias in the recommendation output. However, it is chal-
lenging to combine fairness with accuracy in recommender systems,
mainly because the goals of fairness and accuracy are inconsistent and
the trade-off between them is substantial. In recommender systems,
accuracy is determined by the system’s capacity to accurately antici-
pate and meet the needs and interests of users. Taking the example
of a multi-stakeholder recommender system (such as suppliers and
consumers), users want the recommendation system to recommend
products that meet their preferences, and suppliers want to make the
items they provide as fair as possible to recommend to users. If the
fairness of item exposure is maintained, it may lead to a decrease in
the accuracy of recommendations. Therefore, controlling the trade-off
between accuracy and fairness becomes critical.
Mutual promotion with trustworthy properties. At present, build-
ing a trustworthy recommendation system is the development trend
of artificial intelligence. Credibility includes multiple properties, and
fairness is one of them. Most of the current work focuses on the
association between fairness and trustworthiness, and does not study
the law of mutual influence between these properties. For example, the
work of Fu et al. [139] introduces achieving fairness on an explainable
recommender system. This type of work mainly addresses the issue
of fairness without improving explainability. In other words, these
approaches to fairness do not promote explainability. We hope that
future works can focus on the intrinsic interaction between fairness and
other trustworthy properties in recommender systems. In addition to
explainability, there is also little work that considers the positive and
negative effects between robustness and fairness.
Most of the current fairness work coexists with only one fairness
property, and no work comprehensively considers all fairness proper-
ties. Another challenge in the future is how to integrate fairness and
other credible properties in a recommender system, establish internal
correlations between fairness and properties, reduce conflicts between
properties, and build a credible recommender system. Table 6 shows
the current state of research on integrating fairness methods and trust-
worthiness properties. It is evident that numerous areas have yet to be
explored, such as the application of reinforcement learning methodolo-
gies to develop explainability and fairness recommender systems. There
remains significant research potential in exploring the integration of
trustworthiness and fairness.

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
18
D. Jin et al.
8. Conclusion
Recommender systems provide basic artificial intelligence services
to facilitate our daily lives. To ensure that fairness-aware recommender
systems are crucial for people to enjoy trustworthy recommendations,
this survey reviews current efforts on fair recommender systems with
the aim of facilitating their implementation and future research. Firstly,
we establish a foundation by introducing fundamental concepts related
to recommender systems and fairness. This introduction will later aid
us in defining fairness in various contexts. Then, we introduce different
types of biases that cause unfairness at each stage of the recommender
system’s lifecycle. Finally, we introduce the manifestations of fairness
in different recommendation scenarios, which paves the way for the
introduction of subsequent methods. For fairness-aware recommenda-
tion methods, we introduce three processing stages: pre-processing,
in-processing, and post-processing. We summarize the categories of
methods and divide them in detail in each processing stage. For the
evaluation of the fairness-aware recommender system, we introduce
the data sets suitable for different recommendation scenarios and the
fairness measurement metrics. For the application of fairness-aware rec-
ommender systems in the real world, we describe how fairness-aware
recommender systems maintain fairness in areas closely related to
people’s lives, such as e-commerce, education, and et al. Regarding the
promotion of human trust in fairness-aware recommender systems, we
start with several trustworthy properties and introduce the correlation
between fairness and these trustworthy properties. We conclude this
survey and discuss the future directions of fairness-aware recommender
systems from several novel perspectives, including the development
direction of fair recommender systems, as well as the development of
fair and trustworthy recommender systems.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Di Jin: Conceptualization, Project administration, Writing – original
draft. Luzhi Wang: Writing – original draft. He Zhang: Writing –
original draft. Yizhen Zheng: Writing – original draft. Weiping Ding:
Writing – review & editing. Feng Xia: Writing – review & editing.
Shirui Pan: Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Di
Jin reports financial support was provided by National Science Foun-
dation. Shirui Pan reports financial support was provided by Australian
Research Council.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] F. Ricci, L. Rokach, B. Shapira, Recommender systems: Techniques, applications,
and challenges, in: Recommender Systems Handbook, 2022, pp. 1–35.
[2] B. Kersbergen, S. Schelter, Learnings from a retail recommendation system on
billions of interactions at bol.com, in: 2021 IEEE 37th International Conference
on Data Engineering, ICDE, IEEE, 2021, pp. 2447–2452.
[3] Y. Gu, W. Bao, D. Ou, X. Li, B. Cui, B. Ma, H. Huang, Q. Liu, X. Zeng, Self-
supervised learning on users’ spontaneous behaviors for multi-scenario ranking
in e-commerce, in: Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on
Information & Knowledge Management, 2021, pp. 3828–3837.
[4] X. Guo, S. Wang, H. Zhao, S. Diao, J. Chen, Z. Ding, Z. He, J. Lu, Y. Xiao, B.
Long, et al., Intelligent online selling point extraction for e-commerce recom-
mendation, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
2022, pp. 12360–12368.
[5] J. Yang, J. Li, S. Liu, A novel technique applied to the economic investigation
of recommender system, Multimedia Tools Appl. 77 (2018) 4237–4252.
[6] D. Toquica, K. Agbossou, R. Malhamé, N. Henao, S. Kelouwani, M. Fournier,
A recommender system for predictive control of heating systems in economic
demand response programs, IEEE Open J. Ind. Appl. 3 (2022) 79–89.
[7] M. Bogaert, J. Lootens, D. Van den Poel, M. Ballings, Evaluating multi-label
classifiers and recommender systems in the financial service sector, European
J. Oper. Res. 279 (2019) 620–634.
[8] T. Hassan, B. Edmison, T. Stelter, D.S. McCrickard, Learning to trust: Under-
standing editorial authority and trust in recommender systems for education,
in: Proceedings of the 29th ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization, 2021, pp. 24–32.
[9] A.C. Chuang, N.F. Huang, J.W. Tzeng, C.A. Lee, Y.X. Huang, H.H. Huang,
Moocers: Exercise recommender system in moocs based on reinforcement
learning algorithm, in: 2021 8th International Conference on Soft Computing
& Machine Intelligence, ISCMI, IEEE, 2021, pp. 186–190.
[10] A. Agarwal, D.S. Mishra, S.V. Kolekar, Knowledge-based recommendation
system using semantic web rules based on learning styles for moocs, Cogent
Eng. 9 (2022) 2022568.
[11] Z. Qin, S.J. Chen, D. Metzler, Y. Noh, J. Qin, X. Wang, Attribute-based
propensity for unbiased learning in recommender systems: Algorithm and case
studies, in: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2020, pp. 2359–2367.
[12] C. Musto, P. Lops, G. Semeraro, Fairness and popularity bias in recommender
systems: an empirical evaluation, 2021.
[13] E. Gómez, C. Shui Zhang, L. Boratto, M. Salamó, The winner takes it all:
Geographic imbalance and provider (un)fairness in educational recommender
systems, in: Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2021, pp. 1808–1812.
[14] Y. Wang, W. Ma, M. Zhang*, Y. Liu, S. Ma, A survey on the fairness of
recommender systems, ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. (2022) http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
3547333.
[15] Y. Li, H. Chen, Z. Fu, Y. Ge, Y. Zhang, User-oriented fairness in
recommendation, in: WWW, ACM / IW3C2, 2021, pp. 624–632.
[16] H. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Fan, X. Liu, Y. Li, S. Jain, A.K. Jain, J. Tang, Trustworthy
AI: A computational perspective, 2021, CoRR abs/2107.06641.
[17] H. Zhang, B. Wu, X. Yuan, S. Pan, H. Tong, J. Pei, Trustworthy graph neural
networks: Aspects, methods and trends, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07424.
[18] W. Fan, X. Zhao, X. Chen, J. Su, J. Gao, L. Wang, Q. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Xu,
L. Chen, Q. Li, A comprehensive survey on trustworthy recommender systems,
2022, CoRR abs/2209.10117.
[19] M. Fang, J. Liu, M. Momma, Y. Sun, Fairroad: Achieving fairness for recom-
mender systems with optimized antidote data, in: SACMAT, ACM, 2022, pp.
173–184.
[20] O. Lesota, A. Melchiorre, N. Rekabsaz, S. Brandl, D. Kowald, E. Lex, M. Schedl,
Analyzing item popularity bias of music recommender systems: Are different
genders equally affected? in: Fifteenth ACM Conference on Recommender
Systems, 2021, pp. 601–606.
[21] L. Wu, L. Chen, P. Shao, R. Hong, X. Wang, M. Wang, Learning fair represen-
tations for recommendation: A graph-based perspective, in: Proceedings of the
Web Conference 2021, 2021, pp. 2198–2208.
[22] E. Holmes, Anti-discrimination rights without equality, Mod. Law Rev. 68
(2005) 175–194.
[23] N. Mehrabi, F. Morstatter, N. Saxena, K. Lerman, A. Galstyan, A survey on bias
and fairness in machine learning, ACM Comput. Surv. 54 (2021) 115:1–115:35.
[24] A.J. Biega, K.P. Gummadi, G. Weikum, Equity of attention: Amortizing
individual fairness in rankings, in: SIGIR, ACM, 2018, pp. 405–414.
[25] D. Pedreschi, S. Ruggieri, F. Turini, Measuring discrimination in socially-
sensitive decision records, in: SDM, SIAM, 2009, pp. 581–592.
[26] M. Mansoury, H. Abdollahpouri, M. Pechenizkiy, B. Mobasher, R. Burke, A
graph-based approach for mitigating multi-sided exposure bias in recommender
systems, ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 40 (2022) 32:1–32:31.
[27] Y. Ge, S. Liu, R. Gao, Y. Xian, Y. Li, X. Zhao, C. Pei, F. Sun, J. Ge, W. Ou,
et al., Towards long-term fairness in recommendation, in: Proceedings of the
14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 2021, pp.
445–453.
[28] R. Dorfman, A formula for the gini coefficient, Rev. Econ. Stat. (1979) 146–149.
[29] H. Zhang, X. Yuan, Q.V.H. Nguyen, S. Pan, On the interaction between node
fairness and edge privacy in graph neural networks, 2023, CoRR abs/2301.
12951.
[30] S. Wu, F. Sun, W. Zhang, X. Xie, B. Cui, Graph neural networks in recommender
systems: a survey, in: ACM Computing Surveys, CSUR, 2022, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/3535101.
[31] Y. Deldjoo, T.D. Noia, F.A. Merra, A survey on adversarial recommender
systems: From attack/defense strategies to generative adversarial networks,
ACM Comput. Surv. 54 (2021) 35:1–35:38.
[32] L. Wu, X. He, X. Wang, K. Zhang, M. Wang, A survey on accuracy-oriented
neural recommendation: From collaborative filtering to information-rich
recommendation, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. (2022).
[33] M. Zehlike, K. Yang, J. Stoyanovich, Fairness in ranking, part ii: Learning-
to-rank and recommender systems, in: ACM Computing Surveys, CSUR,
2022.

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
19
D. Jin et al.
[34] J. Chen, H. Dong, X. Wang, F. Feng, M. Wang, X. He, Bias and debias in
recommender system: A survey and future directions, 2020, CoRR abs/2010.
03240.
[35] Y. Ge, S. Liu, Z. Fu, J. Tan, Z. Li, S. Xu, Y. Li, Y. Xian, Y. Zhang, A survey on
trustworthy recommender systems, 2022, CoRR abs/2207.12515.
[36] S. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Liu, F. Ricci, Trustworthy recommender
systems, 2022, CoRR abs/2208.06265.
[37] M.N. Freire, L.N. de Castro, E-recruitment recommender systems: a systematic
review, Knowl. Inf. Syst. 63 (2021) 1–20.
[38] J. Lu, D. Wu, M. Mao, W. Wang, G. Zhang, Recommender system application
developments: A survey, Decis. Support Syst. 74 (2015) 12–32.
[39] D. Jin, L. Wang, Y. Zheng, G. Song, F. Jiang, X. Li, W. Lin, S. Pan, Dual intent
enhanced graph neural network for session-based new item recommendation,
in: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, WWW 2023, Austin, TX,
USA, 30 April 2023-4 May 2023, 2023, pp. 684–693, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1145/3543507.3583526.
[40] C. Gao, W. Lei, X. He, M.de. Rijke, T. Chua, Advances and challenges in
conversational recommender systems: A survey, AI Open 2 (2021) 100–126.
[41] K. Lamertz, The social construction of fairness: Social influence and sense
making in organizations, J. Organ. Behav. 23 (2002) 19–37.
[42] J. Konow, A positive theory of economic fairness, J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 31
(1996) 13–35.
[43] F.I. Michelman, Property, utility, and fairness: comments on the ethical founda-
tions of just compensation law, in: Constitutional Protection of Private Property
and Freedom of Contract, Routledge, 2013, pp. 117–210.
[44] S. Salloum, D. Rajamanthri, Implementation and evaluation of movie rec-
ommender systems using collaborative filtering, J. Adv. Inf. Technol. 12
(2021).
[45] D. Lian, Y. Wu, Y. Ge, X. Xie, E. Chen, Geography-aware sequential location
recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2020, pp. 2009–2019.
[46] A. Ferraro, X. Serra, C. Bauer, Break the loop: Gender imbalance in music
recommenders, in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Human Information
Interaction and Retrieval, 2021, pp. 249–254.
[47] A. Giabelli, L. Malandri, F. Mercorio, M. Mezzanzanica, A. Seveso, Skills2job:
A recommender system that encodes job offer embeddings on graph databases,
Appl. Soft Comput. 101 (2021) 107049.
[48] Y. Wu, R. Xie, Y. Zhu, F. Zhuang, A. Xiang, X. Zhang, L. Lin, Q. He,
Selective fairness in recommendation via prompts, in: Proceedings of the
45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, 2022, pp. 2657–2662.
[49] A. Datta, M.C. Tschantz, A. Datta, Automated experiments on ad privacy
settings: A tale of opacity, choice, and discrimination, 2014, CoRR abs/1408.
6491.
[50] B. Imana, A. Korolova, J.S. Heidemann, Auditing for discrimination in
algorithms delivering job ads, in: WWW, ACM / IW3C2, 2021, pp. 3767–3778.
[51] V. Do, S. Corbett-Davies, J. Atif, N. Usunier, Online certification of preference-
based fairness for personalized recommender systems, in: Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022, pp. 6532–6540.
[52] Y. Zhao, W. Ma, Y. Jiang, J. Zhan, A moocs recommender system based on
user’s knowledge background, in: KSEM, Springer, 2021, pp. 140–153.
[53] Z. Zheng, Z. Qiu, T. Xu, X. Wu, X. Zhao, E. Chen, H. Xiong, Cbr: Context bias
aware recommendation for debiasing user modeling and click prediction, in:
Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, 2022, pp. 2268–2276.
[54] G. Jawaheer, M. Szomszor, P. Kostkova, Comparison of implicit and explicit
feedback from an online music recommendation service, in: HetRec@RecSys,
ACM, 2010, pp. 47–51.
[55] F. Liang, W. Pan, Z. Ming, Fedrec++: Lossless federated recommendation with
explicit feedback, in: AAAI, AAAI Press, 2021, pp. 4224–4231.
[56] X. Zhang, S. Dai, J. Xu, Z. Dong, Q. Dai, J.R. Wen, Counteracting user
attention bias in music streaming recommendation via reward modification,
in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2504–2514.
[57] S. Gupta, H. Wang, Z.C. Lipton, Y. Wang, Correcting exposure bias for link
recommendation, in: ICML, PMLR, 2021, pp. 3953–3963.
[58] M. Cheng, F. Yuan, Q. Liu, S. Ge, Z. Li, R. Yu, D. Lian, S. Yuan, E.
Chen, Learning recommender systems with implicit feedback via soft target
enhancement, in: SIGIR, ACM., 2021, pp. 575–584.
[59] R.C. Chen, Q. Ai, G. Jayasinghe, W.B. Croft, Correcting for recency bias in job
recommendation, 2019, pp. 2185–2188.
[60] D. Cohen, M. Aharon, Y. Koren, O. Somekh, R. Nissim, Expediting exploration
by attribute-to-feature mapping for cold-start recommendations, in: RecSys,
ACM, 2017, pp. 184–192.
[61] M. Vartak, A. Thiagarajan, C. Miranda, J. Bratman, H. Larochelle, A meta-
learning perspective on cold-start recommendations for items, in: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 30, 2017.
[62] Z. Zhu, J. Kim, T. Nguyen, A. Fenton, J. Caverlee, Fairness among new items
in cold start recommender systems, in: SIGIR, ACM, 2021, pp. 767–776.
[63] Q. Wan, X. He, X. Wang, J. Wu, W. Guo, R. Tang, Cross pairwise ranking for
unbiased item recommendation, in: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference
2022, 2022, pp. 2370–2378.
[64] Z. Zhu, J. Wang, J. Caverlee, Measuring and mitigating item under-
recommendation bias in personalized ranking systems, in: SIGIR, ACM, 2020,
pp. 449–458.
[65] H. Abdollahpouri, M. Mansoury, R. Burke, B. Mobasher, The unfairness of
popularity bias in recommendation, in: RMSE@RecSys, CEUR-WS.org, 2019.
[66] M. Naghiaei, H.A. Rahmani, M. Dehghan, The unfairness of popularity bias in
book recommendation, in: BIAS, Springer, 2022, pp. 69–81.
[67] M. Marras, L. Boratto, G. Ramos, G. Fenu, Equality of learning opportunity via
individual fairness in personalized recommendations, Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ.
32 (2022) 636–684.
[68] D. Zhang, J. Wang, Recommendation fairness: From static to dynamic, 2021,
CoRR abs/2109.03150.
[69] Z. Wang, Q. Xu, Z. Yang, X. Cao, Q. Huang, Implicit feedbacks are not
always favorable: Iterative relabeled one-class collaborative filtering against
noisy interactions, in: ACM Multimedia, ACM, 2021, pp. 3070–3078.
[70] F. Kamiran, T. Calders, Data preprocessing techniques for classification without
discrimination, Knowl. Inf. Syst. 33 (2011) 1–33.
[71] A. Estabrooks, T. Jo, N. Japkowicz, A multiple resampling method for learning
from imbalanced data sets, Comput. Intell. 20 (2004) 18–36.
[72] M. Montanari, C. Bernardis, P. Cremonesi, On the impact of data sampling on
hyper-parameter optimisation of recommendation algorithms, in: SAC, ACM,
2022, pp. 1399–1402.
[73] J. Ding, Y. Quan, X. He, Y. Li, D. Jin, Reinforced negative sampling for
recommendation with exposure data, in: IJCAI, ijcai.org, 2019, pp. 2230–2236.
[74] L.E. Celis, A. Deshpande, T. Kathuria, N.K. Vishnoi, How to be fair and diverse?,
2016, arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.07183.
[75] N. Sachdeva, J.J. McAuley, How useful are reviews for recommendation?
A critical review and potential improvements, in: SIGIR, ACM, 2020, pp.
1845–1848.
[76] J. Wang, Y. Yang, S. Wang, J. Hu, Q. Wang, Context- and fairness-aware in-
process crowdworker recommendation, ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 31
(2022) 35:1–35:31.
[77] X. Luo, M. Zhou, Y. Xia, Q. Zhu, An efficient non-negative matrix-factorization-
based approach to collaborative filtering for recommender systems, IEEE Trans.
Ind. Inform. 10 (2014) 1273–1284.
[78] Y. Yuan, X. Luo, M. Shang, Effects of preprocessing and training biases in
latent factor models for recommender systems, Neurocomputing 275 (2018)
2019–2030.
[79] T. Wei, J. He, Comprehensive fair meta-learned recommender system, in:
Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1989–1999.
[80] F. Prost, H. Qian, Q. Chen, E.H. Chi, J. Chen, A. Beutel, Toward a better trade-
off between performance and fairness with kernel-based distribution matching,
2019, CoRR abs/1910.11779.
[81] A. Beutel, J. Chen, T. Doshi, H. Qian, L. Wei, Y. Wu, L. Heldt, Z. Zhao, L. Hong,
E.H. Chi, C. Goodrow, Fairness in recommendation ranking through pairwise
comparisons, in: KDD, ACM, 2019, pp. 2212–2220.
[82] M. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Yang, K. Zhang, Collaborative filtering with social
exposure: A modular approach to social recommendation, in: AAAI, AAAI Press,
2018, pp. 2516–2523.
[83] J. Wasilewski, N. Hurley, Incorporating diversity in a learning to rank
recommender system, in: FLAIRS Conference, AAAI Press, 2016, pp. 572–578.
[84] D. Kiswanto, D. Nurjanah, R. Rismala, Fairness aware regularization on
a learning-to-rank recommender system for controlling popularity bias in
e-commerce domain, in: 2018 International Conference on Information
Technology Systems and Innovation, ICITSI, IEEE, 2018, pp. 16–21.
[85] H. Abdollahpouri, R. Burke, B. Mobasher, Controlling popularity bias in
learning-to-rank recommendation, in: RecSys, ACM, 2017, pp. 42–46.
[86] Y. Hu, Y. Koren, C. Volinsky, Collaborative filtering for implicit feedback
datasets, in: ICDM, IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 263–272.
[87] B. Rastegarpanah, K.P. Gummadi, M. Crovella, Fighting fire with fire: Using
antidote data to improve polarization and fairness of recommender systems, in:
WSDM, ACM, 2019, pp. 231–239.
[88] R. Burke, N. Sonboli, A. Ordonez-Gauger, Balanced neighborhoods for
multi-sided fairness in recommendation, in: FAT, PMLR, 2018, pp. 202–214.
[89] B. Edizel, F. Bonchi, S. Hajian, A. Panisson, T. Tassa, Fairecsys: mitigating
algorithmic bias in recommender systems, Int. J. Data Sci. Anal. 9 (2020)
197–213.
[90] R. Borges, K. Stefanidis, F2VAE: a framework for mitigating user unfairness in
recommendation systems, in: SAC, ACM, 2022, pp. 1391–1398.
[91] C. Wu, F. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Huang, X. Xie, Fairness-aware news recommenda-
tion with decomposed adversarial learning, in: AAAI, AAAI Press, 2021, pp.
4462–4469.
[92] L. Boratto, G. Fenu, M. Marras, Interplay between upsampling and regulariza-
tion for provider fairness in recommender systems, User Model. User Adapt.
Interact. 31 (2021) 421–455.
[93] Z. Zhu, X. Hu, J. Caverlee, Fairness-aware tensor-based recommendation, in:
CIKM, ACM, 2018, pp. 1153–1162.

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
20
D. Jin et al.
[94] W. Sun, S. Khenissi, O. Nasraoui, P. Shafto, Debiasing the human-recommender
system feedback loop in collaborative filtering, in: WWW (Companion Volume),
ACM, 2019, pp. 645–651.
[95] Z. Qin, S.J. Chen, D. Metzler, Y. Noh, J. Qin, X. Wang, Attribute-based
propensity for unbiased learning in recommender systems: Algorithm and case
studies, 2020, pp. 2359–2367.
[96] M. Zhao, L. Wu, Y. Liang, L. Chen, J. Zhang, Q. Deng, K. Wang, X. Shen,
T. Lv, R. Wu, Investigating accuracy-novelty performance for graph-based
collaborative filtering, in: SIGIR, ACM, 2022, pp. 50–59.
[97] Y. Zhang, F. Feng, X. He, T. Wei, C. Song, G. Ling, Y. Zhang, Causal intervention
for leveraging popularity bias in recommendation, in: Proceedings of the
44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, 2021, pp. 11–20.
[98] T. Wei, F. Feng, J. Chen, Z. Wu, J. Yi, X. He, Model-agnostic counterfactual rea-
soning for eliminating popularity bias in recommender system, in: Proceedings
of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
2021, pp. 1791–1800.
[99] J. Huang, H. Oosterhuis, M. de Rijke, It is different when items are older:
Debiasing recommendations when selection bias and user preferences are
dynamic, in: Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on
Web Search and Data Mining, 2022, pp. 381–389.
[100] R. Acharyya, S. Das, A. Chattoraj, M.I. Tanveer, Fairyted: A fair rating
predictor for ted talk data, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2020, pp. 338–345.
[101] X. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Sun, J. Qi, Combating selection biases in recommender
systems with a few unbiased ratings, in: WSDM, ACM, 2021, pp. 427–435.
[102] L. Xia, C. Huang, C. Zhang, Self-supervised hypergraph transformer for
recommender systems, in: KDD, ACM, 2022, pp. 2100–2109.
[103] T. Schnabel, A. Swaminathan, A. Singh, N. Chandak, T. Joachims, Recom-
mendations as treatments: Debiasing learning and evaluation, in: International
Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2016, pp. 1670–1679.
[104] Y. Li, H. Chen, S. Xu, Y. Ge, Y. Zhang, Towards personalized fairness based on
causal notion, in: Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2021, pp. 1054–1063.
[105] X. Qian, Y. Xu, F. Lv, S. Zhang, Z. Jiang, Q. Liu, X. Zeng, T. Chua, F. Wu,
Intelligent request strategy design in recommender system, in: KDD, ACM, 2022,
pp. 3772–3782.
[106] Z. Wang, Y. He, J. Liu, W. Zou, P.S. Yu, P. Cui, Invariant preference learning for
general debiasing in recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1969–1978.
[107] S. Rajanala, A. Pal, M. Singh, R.C.W. Phan, K. Wong, Descover: Debiased
semantic context prior for venue recommendation, in: Proceedings of the
45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, 2022, pp. 2456–2461.
[108] H. Liu, N. Zhao, X. Zhang, H. Lin, L. Yang, B. Xu, Y. Lin, W. Fan, Dual
constraints and adversarial learning for fair recommenders, Knowl.-Based Syst.
239 (2022) 108058.
[109] C. Rus, J. Luppes, H. Oosterhuis, G.H. Schoenmacker, Closing the gender wage
gap: Adversarial fairness in job recommendation, 2022, CoRR abs/2209.09592.
[110] Y. Ge, X. Zhao, L. Yu, S. Paul, D. Hu, C.C. Hsieh, Y. Zhang, Toward pareto
efficient fairness-utility trade-off in recommendation through reinforcement
learning, in: Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining, 2022, pp. 316–324.
[111] Z. Fu, Y. Xian, S. Geng, G. de Melo, Y. Zhang, Popcorn: Human-in-the-loop
popularity debiasing in conversational recommender systems, in: CIKM, 2021,
pp. 494–503, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482461.
[112] H. Liu, D. Tang, J. Yang, X. Zhao, H. Liu, J. Tang, Y. Cheng, Rating distribution
calibration for selection bias mitigation in recommendations, in: Proceedings of
the ACM Web Conference 2022, 2022, pp. 2048–2057.
[113] C. Zhou, J. Ma, J. Zhang, J. Zhou, H. Yang, Contrastive learning for debiased
candidate generation in large-scale recommender systems, in: Proceedings of
the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
2021, pp. 3985–3995.
[114] Q. Shen, W. Tao, J. Zhang, H. Wen, Z. Chen, Q. Lu, Sar-net: A scenario-aware
ranking network for personalized fair recommendation in hundreds of travel
scenarios, 2021, CoRR abs/2110.06475.
[115] C.T. Li, C. Hsu, Y. Zhang, Fairsr: Fairness-aware sequential recommenda-
tion through multi-task learning with preference graph embeddings, in: ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, TIST, 2022, pp. 131–121.
[116] M. Naghiaei, H.A. Rahmani, Y. Deldjoo, Cpfair: Personalized consumer and
producer fairness re-ranking for recommender systems, 2022, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.08085.
[117] M. Mansoury, H. Abdollahpouri, M. Pechenizkiy, B. Mobasher, R. Burke,
Fairmatch: A graph-based approach for improving aggregate diversity in recom-
mender systems, in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM Conference on User Modeling,
Adaptation and Personalization, 2020, pp. 154–162.
[118] Y. Wu, J. Cao, G. Xu, Y. Tan, TFROM: A two-sided fairness-aware recom-
mendation model for both customers and providers, 2021, CoRR abs/2104.
09024.
[119] C. Dickens, R. Singh, L. Getoor, Hyperfair: A soft approach to integrating
fairness criteria, 2020, CoRR abs/2009.08952.
[120] R. Mehrotra, J. McInerney, H. Bouchard, M. Lalmas, F. Diaz, Towards a fair
marketplace: Counterfactual evaluation of the trade-off between relevance,
fairness & satisfaction in recommendation systems, in: CIKM, ACM, 2018, pp.
2243–2251.
[121] A. Singh, T. Joachims, Fairness of exposure in rankings, KDD (2018)
2219–2228.
[122] K. Yang, J. Stoyanovich, Measuring fairness in ranked outputs, in: SSDBM, ACM,
2017, pp. 221–226.
[123] S.C. Geyik, S. Ambler, K. Kenthapadi, Fairness-aware ranking in search &
recommendation systems with application to linkedin talent search, 2019, CoRR
abs/1905.01989.
[124] M. Tavakol, Fair classification with counterfactual learning, in: SIGIR, ACM,
2020, pp. 2073–2076.
[125] N. Akpinar, C. DiCiccio, P. Nandy, K. Basu, Long-term dynamics of fairness
intervention in connection recommender systems, in: AIES, ACM, 2022, pp.
22–35.
[126] M. Mladenov, E. Creager, K. Ben-Porat, R.S. Zemel, C. Boutilier, Optimizing
long-term social welfare in recommender systems: A constrained matching
approach, in: ICML, PMLR, 2020, pp. 6987–6998.
[127] V. Do, S. Corbett-Davies, J. Atif, N. Usunier, Online certification of preference-
based fairness for personalized recommender systems, in: AAAI, AAAI Press,
2022, pp. 6532–6540.
[128] E.H. Simpson, The interpretation of interaction in contingency tables, J. R. Stat.
Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol. 13 (1951) 238–241.
[129] T. Xiao, S. Wang, Towards unbiased and robust causal ranking for recommender
systems, in: Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1158–1167.
[130] Z. Wang, S. Shen, Z. Wang, B. Chen, X. Chen, J.R. Wen, Unbiased sequential
recommendation with latent confounders, in: Proceedings of the ACM Web
Conference 2022, 2022, pp. 2195–2204.
[131] W. Wang, F. Feng, X. He, X. Wang, T. Chua, Deconfounded recommendation
for alleviating bias amplification, 2021, CoRR abs/2105.10648.
[132] Y. Ge, J. Tan, Y. Zhu, Y. Xia, J. Luo, S. Liu, Z. Fu, S. Geng, Z. Li, Y. Zhang,
Explainable fairness in recommendation, in: E. Amigó, P. Castells, J. Gonzalo,
B. Carterette, J.S. Culpepper, G. Kazai (Eds.), SIGIR ’22: The 45th International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
Madrid, Spain, July 11-15 2022, ACM, 2022, pp. 681–691, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/3477495.3531973.
[133] H. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Lin, B. Xu, N. Zhao, Mitigating sensitive data exposure with
adversarial learning for fairness recommendation systems, Neural Comput. Appl.
(2022) 1–15.
[134] J. Li, Y. Ren, K. Deng, Fairgan: Gans-based fairness-aware learning for recom-
mendations with implicit feedback, in: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference
2022, 2022, pp. 297–307.
[135] Y. Li, H. Chen, S. Xu, Y. Ge, J. Tan, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, Fairness in
recommendation: A survey, 2022, CoRR abs/2205.13619.
[136] W. Liu, F. Liu, R. Tang, B. Liao, G. Chen, P.A. Heng, Balancing accuracy
and fairness for interactive recommendation with reinforcement learning, 2021,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13386.
[137] Z. Deng, L. Huang, C. Wang, J. Lai, P.S. Yu, Deepcf: A unified framework of
representation learning and matching function learning in recommender system,
in: AAAI, AAAI Press, 2019, pp. 61–68.
[138] S. Rendle, C. Freudenthaler, Z. Gantner, L. Schmidt-Thieme, BPR: bayesian
personalized ranking from implicit feedback, in: UAI, AUAI Press, 2009, pp.
452–461.
[139] Z. Fu, Y. Xian, R. Gao, J. Zhao, Q. Huang, Y. Ge, S. Xu, S. Geng, C. Shah,
Y. Zhang, et al., Fairness-aware explainable recommendation over knowledge
graphs, in: Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2020, pp. 69–78.
[140] G.K. Patro, A. Biswas, N. Ganguly, K.P. Gummadi, A. Chakraborty, Fairrec:
Two-sided fairness for personalized recommendations in two-sided platforms,
in: WWW, ACM / IW3C2, 2020, pp. 1194–1204.
[141] V.W. Anelli, T. Di Noia, F.A. Merra, The idiosyncratic effects of adversarial
training on bias in personalized recommendation learning, in: Fifteenth ACM
Conference on Recommender Systems, 2021, pp. 730–735.
[142] Z. Zhu, J. Caverlee, Fighting mainstream bias in recommender systems via local
fine tuning, in: Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on
Web Search and Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1497–1506.
[143] Z. Zhu, Y. He, X. Zhao, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Caverlee, Popularity-opportunity
bias in collaborative filtering, in: Proceedings of the 14th ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 2021, pp. 85–93.
[144] R. Sato, Enumerating fair packages for group recommendations, in: Proceedings
of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining,
2022, pp. 870–878.
[145] H. Wu, B. Mitra, C. Ma, F. Diaz, X. Liu, Joint multisided exposure fairness for
recommendation, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00048.

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
21
D. Jin et al.
[146] C. Zhou, J. Ma, J. Zhang, J. Zhou, H. Yang, Contrastive learning for debiased
candidate generation at scale, 2020, CoRR abs/2005.12964 .
[147] E. Mena-Maldonado, P. Cañamares, Y. Ren, M. Sanderson, Popularity bias in
false-positive metrics for recommender systems evaluation, ACM Trans. Inf.
Syst. 39 (2021) 1–43.
[148] H. Abdollahpouri, M. Mansoury, R. Burke, B. Mobasher, The connection
between popularity bias, calibration, and fairness in recommendation, in:
Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, 2020, pp. 726–731.
[149] R. Islam, K.N. Keya, Z. Zeng, S. Pan, J. Foulds, Debiasing career recommen-
dations with neural fair collaborative filtering, in: Proceedings of the Web
Conference 2021, 2021, pp. 3779–3790.
[150] D. Liu, P. Cheng, H. Zhu, Z. Dong, X. He, W. Pan, Z. Ming, Mitigating
confounding bias in recommendation via information bottleneck, in: Fifteenth
ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, 2021, pp. 351–360.
[151] Y. Saito, S. Yaginuma, Y. Nishino, H. Sakata, K. Nakata, Unbiased recommender
learning from missing-not-at-random implicit feedback, in: Proceedings of the
13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 2020, pp.
501–509.
[152] J. Huang, H. Oosterhuis, M. de Rijke, H. van Hoof, Keeping dataset biases out
of the simulation: A debiased simulator for reinforcement learning based rec-
ommender systems, in: Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems,
2020, pp. 190–199.
[153] C. Yang, Q. Wu, J. Jin, X. Gao, J. Pan, G. Chen, Trading hard negatives and true
negatives: A debiased contrastive collaborative filtering approach, in: IJCAI,
ijcai.org, 2022, pp. 2355–2361.
[154] C. Yang, Q. Wu, J. Jin, X. Gao, J. Pan, G. Chen, Trading hard negatives and
true negatives: A debiased contrastive collaborative filtering approach, 2022,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11752.
[155] T. Qi, F. Wu, C. Wu, P. Sun, L. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Huang, X. Xie, Profairrec:
Provider fairness-aware news recommendation, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:
2204.04724.
[156] Y. Sun, J. Pan, A. Zhang, A. Flores, FM2: field-matrixed factorization machines
for recommender systems, in: WWW, ACM/ IW3C2, 2021, pp. 2828–2837.
[157] D. Antognini, B. Faltings, Fast multi-step critiquing for vae-based recommender
systems, in: RecSys, ACM, 2021, pp. 209–219.
[158] J. Zou, E. Kanoulas, P. Ren, Z. Ren, A. Sun, C. Long, Improving conversational
recommender systems via transformer-based sequential modelling, in: SIGIR,
ACM, 2022, pp. 2319–2324.
[159] W. Krichene, S. Rendle, On sampled metrics for item recommendation,
Commun. ACM 65 (2022) 75–83.
[160] Y. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Li, D. He, T. Liu, A theoretical analysis of NDCG type
ranking measures, in: COLT, JMLR.org, 2013, pp. 25–54.
[161] D.C. da Silva, M.G. Manzato, F.A. Durão, Exploiting personalized calibration and
metrics for fairness recommendation, Expert Syst. Appl. 181 (2021) 115112.
[162] X. Wu, H. Chen, J. Zhao, L. He, D. Yin, Y. Chang, Unbiased learning to
rank in feeds recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 14th ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 2021, pp. 490–498.
[163] Gómez E., C.S. Zhang, L. Boratto, M. Salamó, G. Ramos, Enabling cross-
continent provider fairness in educational recommender systems, Future Gener.
Comput. Syst. 127 (2022) 435–447.
[164] M. Marras, L. Boratto, G. Ramos, G. Fenu, Equality of learning opportunity via
individual fairness in personalized recommendations, Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ.
(2021) 1–49.
[165] L. Boratto, G. Fenu, M. Marras, The effect of algorithmic bias on recom-
mender systems for massive open online courses, in: European Conference on
Information Retrieval, Springer, 2019, pp. 457–472.
[166] T. Qi, F. Wu, C. Wu, Y. Huang, Pp-rec: News recommendation with personalized
user interest and time-aware news popularity, 2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:
2106.01300.
[167] B. Kirdemir, J. Kready, E. Mead, M.N. Hussain, N. Agarwal, D. Adjeroh,
Assessing bias in youtube’s video recommendation algorithm in a cross-lingual
and cross-topical context, in: International Conference on Social Computing,
Behavioral-Cultural Modeling and Prediction and Behavior Representation in
Modeling and Simulation, Springer, 2021, pp. 71–80.
[168] R. Zhan, C. Pei, Q. Su, J. Wen, X. Wang, G. Mu, D. Zheng, P. Jiang, K. Gai, De-
confounding duration bias in watch-time prediction for video recommendation,
in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, 2022, pp. 4472–4481.
[169] C. Wu, F. Wu, T. Qi, Y. Huang, Fairrank: Fairness-aware single-tower ranking
framework for news recommendation, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00541 .
[170] A. Brek, Z. Boufaïda, Semantic approaches survey for job recommender systems,
in: RIF, CEUR-WS.org, 2022, pp. 101–111.
[171] J. Yi, F. Wu, C. Wu, Q. Li, G. Sun, X. Xie, Debiasedrec: Bias-aware user
modeling and click prediction for personalized news recommendation, 2021,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07360.
[172] D. Shakespeare, L. Porcaro, C. Gómez, Exploring artist gender bias in music
recommendation, 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.01715 .
[173] A.B. Melchiorre, E. Zangerle, M. Schedl, Personality bias of music recommen-
dation algorithms, in: Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems,
2020, pp. 533–538.
[174] S. Xu, Y. Li, S. Liu, Z. Fu, Y. Zhang, Learning post-hoc causal explanations for
recommendation, 2020, CoRR abs/2006.16977 .
[175] G. Cornacchia, F. Narducci, A. Ragone, A general model for fair
and explainable recommendation in the loan domain (short paper), in:
KaRS/ComplexRec@RecSys, CEUR-WS.org, 2021.
[176] P. Dokoupil, L. Peska, Robustness against polarity bias in decoupled group rec-
ommendations evaluation, in: Adjunct Proceedings of the 30th ACM Conference
on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization, 2022, pp. 302–307.
[177] Z. Zhu, S. Si, J. Wang, J. Xiao, Cali3f: Calibrated fast fair federated
recommendation system, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13121 .
[178] D. Sacharidis, C.P. Mukamakuza, H. Werthner, Fairness and diversity in social-
based recommender systems, in: UMAP (Adjunct Publication), ACM, 2020, pp.
83–88.
[179] M. Mansoury, H. Abdollahpouri, J. Smith, A. Dehpanah, M. Pechenizkiy, B.
Mobasher, Investigating potential factors associated with gender discrimination
in collaborative recommender systems, in: FLAIRS Conference, AAAI Press,
2020, pp. 193–196.
[180] J. Leonhardt, A. Anand, M. Khosla, User fairness in recommender systems, in:
WWW (Companion Volume), ACM, 2018, pp. 101–102.
[181] L. Schelenz, Diversity-aware recommendations for social justice? exploring user
diversity and fairness in recommender systems, in: UMAP (Adjunct Publication),
ACM, 2021, pp. 404–410.
Di Jin received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
Jilin University, Changchun, China, in 2012. He was a
research scholar in DMG at UIUC from 2019 to 2020. He
is currently a Professor at the College of Intelligence and
Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. His research
interests include graph data mining and graph machine
learning, especially on community detection, network em-
bedding, and GNNs. To date, he has published more than
100 research papers in top-tier journals and conferences,
including the TKDE, TNNLS, TYCB, AAAI, IJCAI, NeurIPS,
and WWW. He was the recipient of the Best Paper Award
Runner-up of WWW 2021, Best Student Paper Award
Runner-up of ICDM 2021, and Rising Star Award of ACM
Tianjin in 2018.
Luzhi Wang is currently a third-year Ph.D. student at
Tianjin University, under the supervision of Prof. Di Jin
and Prof. Shirui Pan. Her primary research interests re-
volve around graph representation learning, self-supervised
learning, and graph neural networks. She has published
numerous papers in top-tier venues and journals, including
the IJCAI, WWW, and TWEB, etc.
He Zhang is currently a Ph.D. student with the Faculty
of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia.
His research interests include graph neural networks, graph
attack and defence, and trustworthy graph learning.

Information Fusion 100 (2023) 101906
22
D. Jin et al.
Yizhen Zheng is a second-year Ph.D. student at Monash
University, supervised by A/Prof. Vincent CS Lee and Prof.
Shirui Pan. His research interests lie in graph representation
learning, self-supervised learning and graph neural net-
works. He received the M.Bus.Info.Sys degree from Monash
University as a Top 1 student in 2020, M.Bus degree from
Monash University in 2018 and B.B.A degree from Shenzhen
University in 2016. He published papers on top venues
and journals such as ICML, NeurIPS, WWW, AAAI, TNNLS,
ICDM, IJCAI, etc. He is invited to review conferences and
journals including TPAMI, TNNLS, ECAI, ICDM, TWEB, PR,
etc.
Weiping Ding (M’16-SM’19) received the Ph.D. degree in
Computer Science, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in 2013. In 2016, He was
a Visiting Scholar at National University of Singapore,
Singapore. From 2017 to 2018, he was a Visiting Pro-
fessor at University of Technology Sydney, Australia. He
is a Full Professor with the School of Information Sci-
ence and Technology, Nantong University, Nantong, China.
His main research directions involve deep neural net-
works, multimodal machine learning, and medical images
analysis. He has published over 200 articles, including
over 90 IEEE Transactions papers. His fifteen authored/co-
authored papers have been selected as ESI Highly Cited
Papers. He serves as an Associate Editor/Editorial Board
member of IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
Learning Systems, IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems,
IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Vehicles, IEEE Transactions on Emerging
Topics in Computational Intelligence, IEEE Transactions
on Artificial Intelligence, Information Fusion, Information
Sciences, Neurocomputing, Applied Soft Computing. He is
the Leading Guest Editor of Special Issues in several presti-
gious journals, including IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, and
Information Fusion.
Dr. Feng Xia is a Professor in School of Computing Tech-
nologies, RMIT University, Australia. He is/was on the
Editorial Boards of over 10 int’l journals. He has served as
the General Chair, PC Chair, Workshop Chair, or Publicity
Chair of over 30 int’l conferences and workshops, and PC
Member of over 90 conferences. Dr. Xia has authored/co-
authored two books and over 300 scientific papers in
int’l journals and conferences (such as IEEE TAI, TKDE,
TNNLS, TC, TMC, TPDS, TBD, TCSS, TNSE, TETCI, TETC,
THMS, TVT, TITS, TASE, ACM TKDD, TIST, TWEB, TOMM,
WWW, AAAI, SIGIR, WSDM, CIKM, JCDL, EMNLP, and
INFOCOM). He was recognized as a Highly Cited Researcher
(2019). Dr. Xia received a number of prestigious awards,
including IEEE DSS 2021 Best Paper Award, IEEE Vehicular
Technology Society 2020 Best Land Transportation Paper
Award, ACM/IEEE JCDL 2020 The Vannevar Bush Best Pa-
per Honorable Mention, IEEE CSDE 2020 Best Paper Award,
WWW 2017 Best Demo Award, IEEE DataCom 2017 Best
Paper Award, IEEE UIC 2013 Best Paper Award, and IEEE
Access Outstanding Associate Editor. He has been invited as
Keynote Speaker at seven int’l conferences, and delivered
a number of Invited Talks at int’l conferences and many
universities worldwide. His research interests include data
science, artificial intelligence, graph learning, and systems
engineering. He is a Senior Member of IEEE and ACM, and
an ACM Distinguished Speaker.
Shirui Pan received a Ph.D. in computer science from
the University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Ultimo, NSW,
Australia. He is an ARC Future Fellow and a professor
at the School of Information and Communication Tech-
nology, Griffith University, Australia. His research interests
include data mining and machine learning. To date, Dr
Pan has published over 150 research papers in top-tier
journals and conferences, including the IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI), IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (TKDE),
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems
(TNNLS), ICML, NeurIPS, KDD, AAAI, IJCAI, WWW, CVPR,
and ICDM. His paper received the Best Student Paper Award
of IEEE ICDM 2020. He is recognized as one of the AI 2000
AAAI/IJCAI Most Influential Scholars in Australia (2022,
2021).