95
Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and
Applications
YUNQILI , HANXIONG CHEN,SHUYUAN XU, YINGQIANG GE,JUNTAO TAN,
SHUCHANG LIU,a n dYONGFENG ZHANG,Rutgers University, USA
As one of the most pervasive applications of machine learning, recommender systems are playing an impor-
tant role on assisting human decision-making. The satisfaction of users and the interests of platforms are
closely related to the quality of the generated recommendation results. However, as a highly data-driven
system, recommender system could be affected by data or algorithmic bias and thus generate unfair results,
which could weaken the reliance of the systems. As a result, it is crucial to address the potential unfairness
problemsinrecommendationsettings.Recently,therehasbeengrowingattentiononfairnessconsiderations
in recommender systems with more and more literature on approaches to promote fairness in recommenda-
tion. However, the studies are rather fragmented and lack a systematic organization, thus making it difficult
to penetrate for new researchers to the domain. This motivates us to provide a systematic survey of existing
works on fairness in recommendation. This survey focuses on the foundations for fairness in recommenda-
tion literature. It first presents a brief introduction about fairness in basic machine learning tasks such as
classification and ranking to provide a general overview of fairness research, as well as introduce the more
complex situations and challenges that need to be considered when studying fairness in recommender sys-
tems. After that, the survey will introduce fairness in recommendation with a focus on the taxonomies of
current fairness definitions, the typical techniques for improving fairness, as well as the datasets for fairness
studiesinrecommendation.Thesurveyalsotalksaboutthechallengesandopportunitiesinfairnessresearch
with the hope of promoting the fair recommendation research area and beyond.
CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies→Machine learning;• Information systems→Recom-
mender systems;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Fairness, recommender system, machine learning
ACM Reference format:
YunqiLi,HanxiongChen,ShuyuanXu,YingqiangGe,JuntaoTan,ShuchangLiu,andYongfengZhang.2023.
FairnessinRecommendation:Foundations,Methods,andApplications. ACMTrans.Intell.Syst.Technol. 14,5,
Article 95 (October 2023), 48 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3610302
1 INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems are playing an essential role in the era of information explosion. They
help users to gain access to the information they are interested in and benefit sellers or pro-
ducers to increase their exposure to gain profits. Since recommender systems are associated
Authors’ address: Y. Li, H. Chen, S. Xu, Y. Ge, J. Tan, S. Liu, and Y. Zhang, Rutgers University, New Brunswick,
NJ; emails: yunqi.li@rutgers.edu, hanxiong.chen@rutgers.edu, shuyuan.xu@rutgers.edu, yingqiang.ge@rutgers.edu,
juntao.tan@rutgers.edu, shuchang.liu@rutgers.edu, yongfeng.zhang@rutgers.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions frompermissions@acm.org.
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
2157-6904/2023/10-ART95 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3610302
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:2 Y. Li et al.
with multi-sided benefits by deciding what information is to be delivered, fairness becomes
an especially critical problem that requires attention. However, in the literature on fairness re-
search, researchers have shown that the recommender system, as a highly data-driven applica-
tion,cansufferfromvariousunfairnessissuesandmayharmthebenefitsofmultiplestakeholders
[2, 20, 35, 87, 124, 129, 131, 137, 236]. For example, an unfair job recommender system may ex-
hibit racial or gender discrimination by disproportionately recommending low-payment jobs to
certain (protected) user groups; e-commerce recommender systems may disproportionately rec-
ommend the products from popular sellers while providing very limited exposure opportunity to
other equally qualified but less popular items; news recommender systems may over-recommend
specific political ideologies over others (sometimes due to echo chambers) that may manipulate
users’ opinions. To improve the satisfaction of various participants, it is important to solve the
unfairness issue in recommender systems to build a positive and sustainable ecosystem. In recent
years,worksonfairrecommendationhavecometotheforeandreceivedincreasingattention.The
goal of this survey is to synthesize the current state of fairness in recommendation and to inspire
more future work in this area.
Webeginthesurveywithabriefintroductionoffairnessinmachinelearningtoprovidereaders
a general and basic background knowledge of fairness research. We talk about the main causes
of unfairness, the typical methods for achieving fairness, the diverse fairness considerations in
machine learning, and their relationship with the theories of justice in ethics. Though focusing
on fairness in recommendation, we first talk about certain fairness concerns and representative
methods in classification and ranking tasks due to the following considerations: First, we
would like to take fairness in basic machine learning tasks such as classification and ranking as
examples to help readers better understand the key concepts introduced in the previous research;
second, before studying fairness in recommendation, the first endeavor to achieve fairness in
the community is to develop fair classifiers and rankers. Therefore, these two areas provide
insightful knowledge and can be enlightening for the researches in fair recommendation, since
recommendation problems can usually be formulated as classification or ranking tasks.
However, promoting fairness in recommendation can face unique challenges. For example,
recommender systems often consist of multiple models to balance multiple goals; recommender
systems are dynamic and need to consider long-term benefits; the extreme data sparsity can also
bring additional difficulties for model learning and evaluating. What is more, unlike fairness in
classification and ranking problems that usually consider a single-side fairness requirement, the
concept of fairness in the recommendation has been extended to multiple-stakeholders [35]a n d
consequently make the fairness problem more challenging. In the main body of the survey, we
introduce fairness in recommendation from four perspectives:taxonomy, techniques, datasets,
and open challenges. As aforementioned, recommender systems consider complicated application
scenarios so researchers view unfairness issues from very different perspectives. This motivates
us to provide a systematical taxonomy of fairness notions in recommendation to help readers
have a clear understanding of how to consider unfairness problems in recommendation scenario.
After that, we introduce the typical techniques for promoting fairness in recommendation to
help explain how to alleviate the various unfairness concerns. Additionally, we collect and
present several publicly available datasets with user- or item-sensitive features to benefit future
fairness studies in recommendation. Last but not the least, we summarize open challenges and
opportunities in fair recommendation research to suggest future directions of this area.
In recent years, there has been an increasing number of articles on fair recommendation, as we
showedinFigure 1.Thescopeofthissurveycoversmorethan260worksincludingtherepresenta-
tivepapersaboutfairnessstudiesinAIandthepapersaboutfairnessinrecommendationpublished
in top Web, IR, RecSys, and Data Mining related conferences and journals such as WWW, SIGIR,
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:3
KDD, RecSys, CIKM, WSDM, AAAI, IJCAI, FAccT, FnTIR, TOIS, TORS, TKDE, TIST, just to name
a few, as well as some of the outstanding arXiv papers.
Fig.1. Thenumberofrelatedpa-
pers in the past five years.
The remaining of this survey is organized as follows: We first
introduce some related surveys and demonstrate the difference
and contributions of this work in Section2. We provide a general
introduction about fairness in machine learning in Section3.W e
introduce the theories of justice and discuss its relationship with
fairnessnotionsinmachinelearninginSection 4.Sections 5and6
briefly talk about fairness studies in classification and ranking
tasks, respectively. Section7 discusses fairness in recommenda-
tion from various perspectives under a comprehensive taxonomy.
We discuss some important challenges and opportunities of fair-
ness research in recommendation in Sections8,a n d9 concludes
the survey.
2 RELATED SURVEYS
Inthepastfewyears,anumberofsurveystalkingaboutfairnessandbiasingeneralmachinelearn-
ing have been published [40, 41, 153, 167, 189, 205]. However, they usually focus on the fairness
worksinclassificationtasks.Someothersurveyspayattentiontoonecertainfieldinmachinelearn-
ing or fairness works, for example, Shi et al. [193] provide a survey to help readers gain insights
into fairness-aware federated learning, Zhang and Liu [248] focus on the literature of fairness in
data-driven sequential decision-making, and Makhlouf et al. [148]r e v i e wal i s to fc a u s a l - b a s e d
fairness notions and study their applicability in real-world scenarios. A few surveys also provide
an overview of fairness in ranking tasks [170, 243]. Recommendation algorithms can usually be
considered as a type of ranking algorithm. However, existing works on fair ranking usually only
consider unfairness issue from the item perspective, such as the item exposure fairness, while the
fairness concept in recommender systems can be more complicated and needs to be considered
from multiple sides [35]. Pitoura et al. [174] talk about fairness in both ranking and recommenda-
tion, and Ekstrand et al. [72] discuss fairness in information access systems such as information
retrieval and recommendation. Though covering a brief introduction about fairness in classifi-
cation and ranking, our survey pays specific attention to organizing the concept of fairness in
recommendation through a comprehensive taxonomy of fairness notions proposed in recommen-
dation problems, the task-specific techniques for promoting recommendation fairness, as well as
thedatasetsspeciallysuitableforfairnessresearchinrecommendation.Moreover,Chenetal.[ 49]
provideasurveyonbiasanddebiasinrecommendersystem,whichcoversapartofcontentabout
fairness in recommendation. However, most of the works on bias in recommendation focus on
improvingtherecommendationaccuracyorrobustnessinout-of-distributionscenariothroughde-
biasingmethodsinsteadofpromotingfairness.Somesurveys,suchasReferences[ 77,86],discuss
the trustworthy perspectives of recommender systems, which includes fairness as a sub-category
of trustworthiness. Our survey differs from these works, as we provide a broader and more in-
depthintroductionoffairnessinrecommendation.Weintroducebothtechnicalandphilosophical
foundations of fairness, better situate recommendation fairness under machine learning fairness
context, and introduce a comprehensive taxonomy of recommendation fairness research.
Recently, two surveys on fairness in recommendation were released concurrently as ours [63,
209]. Compared to these works, our survey offers the following benefits: (1) We better situate rec-
ommendation fairness under the context of machine learning by providing a high-level overview
offairnessstudiesinmachinelearning,theintuitionbehindthefairnessnotionsinmachinelearn-
ing,andthetimelineofhowfairnessresearchdevelopsintheAIfieldfromclassification,ranking,
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:4 Y. Li et al.
Fig. 2. A basic structure of fairness in machine learning and recommender systems.
to recommendation tasks, so readers who are new to the fairness in recommendation field can
effectively build a systematic structure of knowledge without having to read other materials in
advance; (2) We not only introduce the technical approaches to fairness in recommendation, but
also introduce the philosophical foundations of fairness research by introducing how it relates to
the justice theories in philosophical ethics; (3) We offer a thorough taxonomy for fairness in rec-
ommendationresearch,whichhelpsreaderstounderstandthedifferentfairnessconsiderationsin
recommender systems and to build a better organized structure of the literature in the field.
3 FAIRNESS IN MACHINE LEARNING
Inthissection,weprovidebasicbackgroundknowledgeoffairnessinmachinelearning,including
the causes of unfairness, diverse fairness definitions, as well as the fair learning methods. A mind
map of fairness in machine learning and recommender systems is shown in Figure2.
3.1 The Causes of Unfairness
Unfairness in machine learning is usually caused by various forms of biases. A list of different
sources of biases with their corresponding definitions in machine learning has been provided in
several previous surveys [40, 153, 166, 199]. It is out of the scope of this survey to list and discuss
allofthetypesofbiasesinmachinelearning,nevertheless,wewanttotalkaboutthemainsources
ofbiasesfromahigherlevel.Generallyspeaking,asthetwofundamentalcomponentsofmachine
learning system, training data and learning process are also the main sources of biases that can
leadtounfairresultsinmachinelearningtasks.Therefore,amongallkindsofbiases,wecategorize
them into two types:Data Biasand Model Bias.I ns p e c i fi c ,Data Biascovers the types of biases
lying in the training data itself, such as the biases coming from the processes of data generation,
data collection, and data storage; meanwhile,Model Biasincludes biases that are not present in
the input data, but introduced in the processes of model designing, model training, and model
evaluation.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:5
3.1.1 Data Bias. Most of the biases in machine learning lie in the data itself. The bias in data
cancomefromtheprocessesofdatageneration,datacollection,datastorage,andsoon.Here,we
roughly categorize the data bias intoStatistical Biasand Pre-existing Bias.
StatisticalBias [40].Thestatisticalbiasusuallyarisesfromtheprocessofdatacollection,storage,
orcleaning.Itoccurswhenthereareflawsintheexperimentaldesignordatacollectionprocessand
thusthedataisnotthetruerepresentationofthepopulation.Forexample,thedataisnotrandomly
selected from the full population, is wrongly recorded, or is systematically missing, resulting in
the lack of population diversity or other anomalies. Statistical bias can easily lead to systematic
differences between the true parameters and the estimated statistics of a population.
Pre-existing Bias[199]. Even if the data is perfectly sampled and selected, the bias can also be
pre-existing in the data during the generation process. For example, pre-existing bias can occur
when the data itself reflects biased decisions, which usually leads to the system being no longer
objective and fair. Suppose a company recruiter tends to hire employees with certain race, and
the company wants to train a hiring decision system based on its previous recruitment records.
The learned system will have a systematic favor towards certain races of people when making
hiringdecisions.Inthiscase,theAIsystemwillreinforcethepre-existingbiasencodedbyhuman
decision-makers.
3.1.2 Model Bias. Moreover, unfairness can arise from the biases in model designing, model
training, and model evaluating processes, such as the biased model architecture, improper use of
certainoptimizationmethodsorestimators,andinappropriatebenchmarks[ 16].Here,welisttwo
representative biases from model designing and model evaluation that may bring unfairness and
affect user satisfaction.
OmittedVariableBias 1 [153].Theomittedvariablebiashappenswhensomeimportantvariables
orfeaturesarenotconsideredwhendesigningandtrainingthemodel.Forexample,supposethere
is a study that investigates the gender pay gap. If the study only considers variables such as edu-
cation and work experience, but fails to consider the differences in negotiation skills, then it may
lead to an omitted variable bias. Omitting important variables that are related to both gender and
income can result in biased estimates of the gender pay gap, since the real impact of gender on
income may be confounded by those unmeasured factors.
Evaluation Bias[199]. The evaluation bias usually occurs when inappropriate benchmarks are
usedinmodelevaluation.Examplesincludethe Adience and IJB-A (IARPA Janus Benchmark
(A)) benchmarks, which are biased to skin color and gender when evaluating facial recognition
systems [153].
Itisworthnotingthatthebiasesareintertwinedduetothefeedbackloopphenomenon[ 56].The
datausedfortrainingmachinelearningmodelsareusuallycollectedfromuserbehaviorsthatmay
present inherent biases, however, the user behaviors can also be affected by the biased learning
algorithms, resulting in the further introduction of bias in the data generation process. Therefore,
it is important to consider how the biases affect each other to solve them accordingly [153].
3.1.3 OtherCauses. Itisimportanttonoticethatbiasmaynotbetheonlyreasonforunfairness
and there could be other causes, as a result, researchers should always take caution. One example
istheconflictbetweendifferentfairnessrequirements.Researcheshaveshownthatsomefairness
requirementscannotbesatisfiedsimultaneously[ 55,120,175],therefore,theviolationofonetype
offairnessmaybecausedbyensuringanother.Wewillintroducemoredetailsontherelationship
between fairness definitions in the following parts of the survey.
1Retrieved fromhttps://data36.com/statistical-bias-types-explained/
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:6 Y. Li et al.
3.2 Fairness Definition
Anacceptedfactinfairnessstudyisthatthereisnoconsensusonfairnessdefinitions,sincethefair-
nessdemandscanbedifferentunderdifferentscenarios.Thefairnessconcernscanbeputforward
from various perspectives, and it has been theoretically proven that some fairness requirements
cannotbesatisfiedatthesametime[ 55,120,175].Therefore,itisimportanttocarefullychoosethe
fairnessmeasurementsaccordingtospecificproblemsandscenarios,andbemindfulofthepoten-
tial tradeoff between fairness demand and model accuracy. Up to now, many fairness definitions
have been proposed in the literature. In general, the definitions of fairness can be classified into
three categories:Group Fairness;Individual Fairness;a n dHybrid Fairness[205]. The measurement
andevaluationoffairnessmayvary,dependingonitsspecificdefinition.Wefirstprovideageneral
description of the three types of fairness definitions here, and the specific examples in different
machine learning tasks will be introduced in the following sections.
3.2.1 Group Fairness. In the study of group fairness requirements, the research subjects are
usually divided into different groups based on a certain grouping method, and the most common
way is to split users by their sensitive features. There is no once-and-for-all answer regarding
which features are considered sensitive features, since different people may have different defini-
tions, while the connotation of sensitive features usually refers to the features that human beings
cannot choose freely at birth or throughout their life such as biological sex, race, and age. Group
fairness requires that the protected groups should be treated similarly as the advantaged groups
by the machine learning systems [40, 41, 153, 205]. For example, to study the unfairness problem
ofgenderdiscriminationinahiringdecision-makingsystem,thecandidateswillbefirstspiltinto
differentgroupsaccordingtotheirgender,andthenfairnesscanbemeasuredthroughcomputing
the difference of system treatments among different groups such as salary or hiring rate.
3.2.2 Individual Fairness. Different from group fairness, individual fairness requires that simi-
lar individuals should be treated similarly [40, 41, 153, 205]. To guarantee individual fairness, we
usually first need to determine whether two individuals are similar according to a certain metric,
for example, according to the distance of user representations. The similarity of individuals could
be determined by certain sensitive features or combination of features. For example, we may con-
siderallmaleuserswhoseagesfallintothesamerangeassimilarindividuals.Sometimes,wemay
also use latent features to determine user similarity, e.g., we may first represent each user as a la-
tentrepresentationvectoraccordingtotheirprofilesorinteractionrecordsandthendecidesimilar
usersbasedonvectorsimilarity.Stillconsidertheaboveexample,whichistostudytheunfairness
probleminahiringdecision-makingsystem.Wecanfirstrepresenteachcandidateasavectorand
then require that those candidates with close representations have similar salaries.
Itisworthwhiletonotethatgroupfairnessandindividualfairnessaretwoorthogonalconcepts.
For example, suppose we put similar individuals into the same group, individual fairness empha-
sizes that individuals within the same group are treated fairly, while group fairness emphasizes
thatdifferentgroupsaretreatedfairlyonaggregatedgroup-level.Anindividuallyfairmethodmay
notbefairgroup-wise,sinceitispossiblethatpeoplewithinthesamegrouparetreatedfairlybut
some groups are much better than other groups. However, a group-wise fair method may not be
individuallyfair,sinceitispossiblethatthegroupsaretreatedfairlyintermsofgroup-aggregated
metricsbutsomeindividualsinagrouparetreatedmuchbetterthanothersinthesamegroup.As
a result, neither group fairness nor individual fairness subsumes the other, and they both need to
be considered carefully.
3.2.3 HybridFairness. Insteadoffocusingononecertainfairnessconsideration,hybridfairness
recognizes the fact that the fairness demands vary in most cases and aims to achieve more than
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:7
one fairness requirements simultaneously. For example, in fair recommendation studies, fairness
demands may come from both user-side and item-side, thus multiple fairness definitions should
be satisfied at the same time [2, 154]. However, it is worth noting that not all fairness definitions
can be guaranteed at the same time, since they sometimes may essentially contradict with each
other [55, 120,175].
3.3 Methods for Fair Machine Learning
Generally, methods that achieve fairness in machine learning fall under three categories:Pre-
processing,In-processing,a n dPost-processing [41, 61,153,240].
3.3.1 Pre-processing Method. As the bias issue is often in data itself, a straightforward way is
to pre-process the training data before the learning process to remove the underlying bias. The
key idea is to train a model on a “corrected” data so the model can be naturally fair. The pre-
processingmethodsareusuallyachievedthroughchangingthelabelvaluesforcertaindatapoints
or mapping the data to a transformed space. The advantages of pre-processing methods are that
thetransformeddatacanbeusedtotrainanydownstreamalgorithmswithoutcertainassumptions.
However, it may suffer unpredictable loss in accuracy and may not remove unfairness on the test
data. What is more, the pre-processing method can only be applied if modifying the training data
is allowed, both in technical and legal senses.
3.3.2 In-processing Method. The in-processing methods usually try to balance the accuracy
and fairness demands through modifying the learning process. Most of the existing works of fair-
ness in machine learning use this way to remove discrimination. The methods are often achieved
through incorporating fairness metrics into the objective function of the main learning task. The
in-processingmethodsusuallyshowgoodperformanceonbothaccuracyandfairnessandprovide
higher flexibility to trade off between them. The main disadvantage is that such strategy usually
leads to a non-convex optimization problem and cannot guarantee optimality.
3.3.3 Post-processing Method. The post-processing methods apply transformations to the
modeloutputtomitigateunfairness.Thisisusuallyachievedbyreassigningthelabelsassignedby
thebasemodels,suchasrecomputingthescoresorre-rankingtheoutputlists.Thepost-processing
methods usually treat the base model as a black-box and provide model-agnostic flexibility. Such
methodsdonotneedtomodifythemodelandtrainingdataandcanachieverelativelygoodperfor-
manceandfairness.However,thepost-processingmethodscannotbeusedwhensensitivefeature
information is unavailable at the decision time (test-time), since they usually need to access the
sensitive information for post-processing.
In short, there are various ways to improve fairness in machine learning, and each method
has its own pros and cons. Choosing which method(s) to use is sometimes not a pure technical
problem, but the social and legal context must also be considered. In the following sections, we
will introduce examples of using pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing methods for
improving fairness.
4 PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF FAIRNESS IN MACHINE LEARNING: THE
THEORIES OF JUSTICE
Nowadays,wehaveseenagrowingnumberofworkstalkingaboutenhancingfairnessinmachine
learningandAI,butfewworkstalkaboutthephilosophicalfoundationsoffairnessconsiderations
inmachinelearning.Inthissection,wewillbrieflyintroducetheconceptofjusticeanditsrelation-
shipwithfairnessinmachinelearningtohelpreadersunderstandthephilosophicalfoundationof
fairness research in machine learning and recommender systems.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:8 Y. Li et al.
Fig. 3. Hierarchy of distinctions of justice.
It is noteworthy that justice takes on different meanings in different practical contexts. There-
fore,itiscrucialtoenquireaboutthefundamentalideasofjusticethatunderlieallofthedifferent
applications[157].Inthissurvey,wefollowReferences[ 157,202]tointroducethebasictheoriesof
justice.Moreover,theunderstandingabouttherelationshipbetweenjusticeandfairnessalsovaries
in different articles. Currently, the terms ‘justice” and “fairness” are frequently used interchange-
ably because of their close relationship, however, some works argue that justice and fairness are
not the same thing; for example, Goldman and Cropanzano [95] demonstrate that“justice should
refer to whether one adheres to certain rules or standards, while fairness should refer to how one re-
spondstoperceptionsoftheserulesandrulecompliance.” Inthissurvey,wewillnotdebatetoomuch
abouthowjusticeandfairnessdifferinnon-AIfields;instead,wewillconcentrateonhowthejus-
ticeconceptinethicsrelatestofairnessstudiesinmachinelearning.Basically,wewillseethatthe
intuitionsbehindtheconceptsofalgorithmicfairnessinmachinelearningisofteninspiredbythe
principleofjustice[ 157,202].Justiceasthephilosophicaloriginoffairnessinmachinelearningis
first discussed in Reference [202], here, we convey similar ideas and extend the discussion about
fairness in machine learning and recommendation research.
4.1 The Theories of Justice
Miller [157] summarizes three overarching theories of justice that can help to unify the various
types of justice:Utilitarianism, Contractarianism,a n dEgalitarianism. The utilitarianism under-
standingofjusticeliesinsupplyingthegreatesthappinessprincipletoguideactions.Utilitarianism
seeks to maximize overall utilities for the greatest number of people while ignoring the concern
of how the utilities are allocated among individuals [157]. The contractarianism view of justice
focuses on building hypothetical principles and agreements that people would choose to adopt.
Making such agreements in the real world is challenging, since people are likely to express the
principles they would prefer from quite radical standpoints [157]. Another theoretical framework
tounderstandjusticeisegalitarianism,whichrequiresasubstantivelyequaldistributionofadvan-
tages. The main challenge for the egalitarianism theory is to clarify what kind of equality that
justice requires in varying circumstances [157]. Broadly speaking, most of the fairness notions
put forth in machine learning literature are consistent with the egalitarianism theory [202]; for
example,theEqualOpportunitynotion[ 101]requiresthesameTruePositiveRateacrossdifferent
groups.Aristotleregardedjusticeas“equalsshouldbetreatedequallyandunequalsunequally”.In
essence, fairness in machine learning requires that “equal” individuals/groups should be treated
“equally.” The key issue is how to establish the similarity criteria to define what are “equal indi-
viduals/groups” and how to determine what kind of equality treatment is appropriate in certain
situations. In light of this, various fairness notions have been proposed, which we will introduce
in more depth in the following sections.
4.2 The Distinctions of Justice
In this section, we briefly introduce the four distinctions of justice as analyzed in References [157,
202]andtheirconnectionswithfairnessconsiderationsinmachinelearning.Thehierarchyofthe
distinctions of justice are shown in Figure3.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:9
The first distinction isConservative Justiceversus Ideal Justice. Conservative Justiceinterprets
justice as solely concerned with what individuals can claim in accordance with existing laws and
socialconventions,andhowindividualscanaddresstheinjusticeinthepresentworldtostrivefor
a better future [157]. Ideal Justiceviews justice on the opposite hand, which demands proposing
principlestoassess,reform,orevenabolishtheexistingnormsandpracticestocreateaworldthat
is perfectly just [157]. Most of the fairness considerations in machine learning follow the idea of
ideal methodology to propose strict fairness requirements and build ideally fair systems [202]. In
specific, current fairness works in machine learning usually first put forward a fairness require-
mentasthelawofafairworld,suchastheEqualOpportunity[ 101],andthenproposemethodsto
meetthefairnessrequirement,whichistypicallyaccompaniedwiththelossofmodelperformance.
However, few works have noticed that the current ideal methodology based methods have essen-
tial shortcomings and encourage the study on conservative (non-ideal) perspective for enhancing
algorithmicfairness[ 79].Insomeareas,buildingideallyfairsystemsmayevenbeharmful;forex-
ample, Zhang et al. [245] study the fairness of chest X-ray classifiers. The authors emphasize that
the group fairness notions often require correcting the performance disparities between advan-
taged and disadvantaged groups, but not all gaps need to be eliminated in healthcare, since some
tasks might be inherently more difficult for some groups, e.g., the survival predictions for elderly
cancerpatients.Considerationoffairnessfromaconservativeandnon-idealperspectiveiscrucial
and challenging, which requires the extensive domain-knowledge to understand the reason for
unfairness and the dynamic long-term impact of potential fairness-promoting interventions [79].
Theseconddistinctionis CorrectiveJustice versusDistributiveJustice.CorrectiveJustice regards
justice as a remedial principle, which applies when one person wrongly interferes with another,
whileDistributiveJustice concernsjusticeasbuildingprinciplesforallocatingvarioustypesofdis-
tributable goods to individuals [157]. Since recommender system can be considered as a type of
resource allocation system [254], fairness considerations in recommendation mostly focus on the
distributive justice to allocate items/opportunities among individuals/groups fairly; for example,
the equal recommendation quality between male and female users or the same admission recom-
mendations for two individuals with the same education backgrounds but different races. When
machinelearningtechniquesareusedinsomecertainfieldssuchascriminaljustice,thecorrective
perspective might be considered to better fit the application scenario [157, 202].
The third distinction isProcedural Justiceversus Substantive Justice. Procedural Justiceempha-
sizes the justice in the decision-making process, whereasSubstantive Justiceconcentrates on the
justiceofthefinaldecisions[ 157].Mostoftheassociation-basedfairnessnotionstakethesubstan-
tive idea and require the equal treatment on performance metrics for different groups or individ-
uals; for example, Equal Opportunity [101] requires the same True Positive Rate across different
groups,andEqualizedOdds[ 19]requiresthatdifferentgroupsshouldhavethesameTruePositive
Rate and False Positive Rate. Recently, to better assess unfairness issues of the machine learning
models, causality-based fairness notions have been proposed to reason about the causal relations
betweenthepredictedresultsandinputfeatures[ 148].Methodstoachievecausality-basedfairness
notionsusuallyinvolveblockingthecausaleffectsfromthesensitivefeaturestothepredictedout-
comes, which aligns with the idea of the procedural justice/fairness [148, 202].
The fourth distinction isComparative Justiceversus Non-comparative Justice. When establish-
ing what one deserves,Comparative Justicenecessitates that one looks at the claims of others,
while Non-comparative Justiceconsiders only his or her own pertinent characteristics [157]. For
fairness notions proposed in machine learning, both comparative and non-comparative views are
presented [202]. Most of the association-based fairness notions consider comparative perspective.
Suchnotionstypicallyentailidentifyingsimilarindividualsorgroupsfirst,andthenaskthatthey
be treated similarly [40, 41, 153, 205]. For example, the group fairness notions require that the
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:10 Y. Li et al.
protected groups should be treated similarly as the advantaged groups such as Statistical Parity
[69,240]andEqualizedOdds[ 19];andtheindividualfairnessnotionsrequirethatsimilarindivid-
uals should be treated similarly such as Fairness through Awareness [69]. Non-comparative con-
siderations are also delivered to the fairness notions in machine learning, such as Counterfactual
Fairness[122],whichrequiresthatthepredictedresultsforanypossibleindividualinthecounter-
factualworldshouldbethesameasintherealworld,wherethesensitivefeaturessuchastherace
of the given individual are changed in the counterfactual world. Counterfactual fairness empha-
sizestheindependencebetweenthesensitivefeaturesandthepredictedoutcomesinessence,and
thus focuses on determining what is owed to people in accordance with solely their true traits.
4.3 The Scope of Justice
The scope of justice includes who and when the rules of justice are applied. Miller [157] analyzes
some aspects of these questions in detail. For example, what kinds of creatures should be covered
within the scope of justice principles? Some philosophers believed that the concepts of justice
shouldonlyapplytohumans;while,otherssupportedtakingtherightsofnon-humananimalsinto
account[157].Theresearchesonfairnessinmachinelearningandrecommendersystemsprimarily
consider human requirements for fairness with a few possible exceptions, such as applications of
machine learning or AI technologies in biological or medical fields, which may necessitate taking
into account non-human animal fairness. Although item-side fairness research is an important
topicinrecommendersystemswhereitemsareinherentlynon-human,researchersareessentially
concernedaboutthehumaninterests,suchasproducerprofits,behindtheitems[ 87,88].Another
crucialquestioniswhetherjusticeisrelationalornon-relational[ 157].Someresearcherssuggested
thattheprinciplesofsocialjusticeshouldonlyapplyamongindividualswhoareengagedtogether
in a certain relationship, while other theories offer alternative descriptions that the principles of
justicehaveuniversalscope[ 157].Thealgorithmicfairnessinmachinelearningmainlyfocuseson
the relational theory of justice and concerns about the unfairness issues under certain scenarios
or within certain domains [202], for example, whether a recommender system offers different
recommendationqualitytousersAandBorwhetheracollegeadmissionprocessfavorsaccepting
applicants of a certain race than others. Other interesting questions about the scope of justice
involves discussing the duties of individuals when institutions are established to deliver justice,
and justice as recognition to avoid the harms from the failures and mistakes of social recognition
to individuals [157]. To ensure and advance social justice and fairness, machine learning and AI
technologies must act more responsibly given their growing social influence.
5 FAIRNESS IN CLASSIFICATION
Tobetterunderstandtheconceptsintroducedabove,webrieflytalkaboutfairnessinclassification
as an example, since it is a basic and important task in machine learning and has been relatively
well-studied in fairness research. Moreover, recommendation problems can sometimes be formu-
latedasaclassificationtask,e.g.,whenwetrytopredictwhethertheuserwillclickanitemornot.
Pedreshi et al. [172] first explored fair classification to avoid discrimination in classification rule
mining. In recent years, a flurry of methods are proposed for promoting fairness in classification.
In the following, we first talk about certain fairness concerns and measurements in classification
task, and then introduce the methods together with examples for solving the unfairness issue.
5.1 Fairness Concerns
Without losing generality, we mainly introduce the fairness research in binary classification task
here. In a binary classification task, there is training dataDT ={(xi,yi )}N
i=1 with user feature
vectors x ∈Rd and the corresponding class labelsy ∈{−1,1}. The aim of binary classification
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:11
problemistopredictthelabel ˆyi throughlearningamappingfunction fθ(xi ).Forexample, ˆyi = 1
if fθ(xi )> 0.5a n dˆyi =−1 otherwise. In the literature of fairness in binary classification, each
user has an associated sensitive features ∈{0,1}. The aim of fair classification is to avoid the
unethical interference of sensitive features into the decision-making process. To this end, several
fairness notions have been proposed to measure the unfairness of classifiers [41, 205]. The two
basicframeworksinrecentstudiesonfairclassificationaregroupfairnessandindividualfairness.
More formally, we introduce the representative fairness notions as follows:
5.1.1 Group Fairness. Group fairness requires that the protectedgroups should be treated sim-
ilarly as the advantaged groups. Most of the fair classification studies focus on group fairness
concerns.Thegroupfairnessnotionsincludethe predictedpositiverate -basedmetricsandthe con-
fusion matrix-based metrics [41]. Predicted positive rate-based metrics require the parity of the
predicted positive rates Pr(ˆy = 1) across different groups, whileconfusion matrix-based metrics
takethe True Positive Rate (TPR), True Negative Rate (TNR), False Positive Rate (FPR),and
False Negative Rate (FNR)intoconsiderationsothedifferencesbetweengroupscanbecaptured
on a more detailed granularity [41]. One example ofPredicted positive rate-based metrics is:
Statistical Parity: The Statistical Parity, also calledDemographic Parityor No Disparate Impact,
requires that each group should have the same likelihood to be classified as positive [69,240]:
Pr (ˆy = 1| s = 0) = Pr (ˆy = 1| s = 1).
Theshortcomingofthisnotionisthatitignoresthedifferencebetweengroups.Forexample,the
less-popularitemsmaybeunpopularforareason,e.g.,duetoitsunsatisfactoryquality.Asaresult,
forcefullyrequiringalloftheunpopularitemstohavethesameclick-throughrateaspopularitems
couldbeunreasonable.Besidesthemetricsthatfocusonthevariantsofthepredictedpositiverate
Pr(ˆy = 1), most of the group fairness criteria are built on confusion matrix. Examples include:
Equal Opportunity: The Equal Opportunity fairness requires that the TPR is the same across
different groups [101]:
Pr (ˆy = 1| y = 1,s = 1) = Pr (ˆy = 1| y = 1,s = 0).
Equalized Odds: Stricter than Equal Opportunity, the Equalized Odds fairness also takes FPR
into account and requires that different groups should have the same true positive rate and false
positive rate [19]:
Pr (ˆy = 1| y = 1,s = 1) = Pr (ˆy = 1| y = 1,s = 0)
&Pr (ˆy = 1| y =−1,s = 1) = Pr (ˆy = 1| y =−1,s = 0).
Overall Accuracy Equality: The Overall Accuracy Equality fairness requires the same accuracy
across groups [19]:
Pr (ˆy =−1| y =−1,s = 1) +Pr (ˆy = 1| y = 1,s = 1)
=Pr (ˆy =−1| y =−1,s = 0) +Pr (ˆy = 1| y = 1,s = 0).
Equalizing Disincentives: The Equalizing Disincentives fairness requires the same difference be-
tween the TPR and FPR across groups [111]:
Pr (ˆy = 1| y = 1,s = 1)−Pr (ˆy = 1| y =−1,s = 1)
=Pr (ˆy = 1| y = 1,s = 0)−Pr (ˆy = 1| y =−1,s = 0).
Treatment Equality: The Treatment Equality fairness requires the same ratio of FNR to FPR
across groups [19]:
Pr (ˆy = 1| y =−1,s = 1)
Pr (ˆy =−1| y = 1,s = 1) = Pr (ˆy = 1| y =−1,s = 0)
Pr (ˆy =−1| y = 1,s = 0).
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:12 Y. Li et al.
5.1.2 Individual Fairness. Instead of considering fairness across groups, individual fairness no-
tions require that similar individuals should be treated similarly [41, 205]. Examples include:
CounterfactualFairness : Counterfactual Fairness is an individual-level causal-basedfairness no-
tion [122]. It requires that for any possible individual, the predicted result of the learning system
should be the same in the counterfactual world as in the real world. Given a set of latent back-
ground variablesU, the predictorˆY is counterfactually fair if under any contextX = x andS =s,
the equation below holds for ally and for any values′ attainable byS:
Pr
(ˆYS←s (U ) =y| X =x,S =s
)
= Pr
(ˆYS←s′ (U ) =y| X =x,S =s
)
.
It is worth noting that counterfactual fairness is a notion defined based on the idea of causality,
which emphasizes the independence between the sensitive features and the predicted outcomes.
However, the techniques to achieve counterfactual fairness can be diverse and are not limited to
typical causal inference methods such as interventions; examples include: simply removing the
sensitivefeaturesandtheirdescendantsfromthemodelandpredictionfunction[ 122];variational
autoencoders [53]; adversarial learning [98]; data pre-processing [47]; causal regularization [64];
data augmentation [147], and so on.
Fairness through Awareness: The Fairness through Awareness requires that any two individuals
with similar non-sensitive features should receive similar predicted results [69]. Let us consider
two individualsx1 andx2. The distance between the two individuals is defined byd (x1,x2 ),a n d
the difference of predicted results between the two individuals is computed throughF (ˆy1, ˆy2 ).
Here, the formulation ofF (·,·) and d (·,·) are usually determined by specific tasks. The Fairness
through Awareness requires that:
F (ˆy1, ˆy2 )≤α·d (x1,x2 ),
whichmeansthatthedifferenceintreatedshouldbeupperboundedbythedifferencebetweenthe
two individuals.
5.2 Methods
In this section, we introduce the methods for promoting fairness in classification. As we talked
above, the techniques of fair classification can mainly be divided into three categories: pre-
processing, in-processing, and post-processing [240]. The methods usually first specify one or
morefairnessnotionstoachieveandthenproposecorrespondingmethodstocontroltheselected
notions.
5.2.1 Pre-processing Method. The pre-processing methods focus on mitigating the bias in data
so any model learned from the data will be fair [240]. The pre-processing methods can be applied
through changing the labels for certain subjects [112, 146], mapping the data to a transformed
space[39],orperturbingthenon-sensitivefeatures[ 80].Forexample,Caldersetal.[ 38]studythe
problemofunfairnessinclassificationandconsiderthecasewherethereisunjustifieddependency
between sensitive features and class labels in the input data. They propose two methods to pre-
processthetrainingdatawiththegoalofreducingthedependencybetweensensitivefeaturesand
class labels while maintaining the overall positive class probability: massaging and re-weighting.
Forthemassagingmethod,theychangethelabelsofsomesubjects x withsensitivefeatures S =s
from “−”t o“+”, and meanwhile change the labels of the same number of objects withS/nequals from
“+”to“−.”Forthere-weightingmethod,theyre-weightthesubjectstoreducethedependency.For
example, subjects withS = s and class label “+” will get higher weights than subjects withS = s
and class label “−.” Subjects withS/nequals and class label “+” will get lower weights than subjects
withS/nequals andclasslabel“ −.”Theauthorsconductexperimentstoshowthatbothofthemethods
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:13
can remove the dependency from training data so the classifier learned from the data would be
fairer. However, the accuracy could be sacrificed after the pre-processing.
5.2.2 In-processing Method. Most oftheworks adoptthe in-processingmethodsto modify the
training procedure of the classifier [93, 114, 178, 214]. For example, Zafar et al. [240] introduce a
flexibleconstraint-basedframeworktoenablethedesignoffairmargin-basedclassifiers.Todesign
a fair convex boundary-based classifier, the authors propose to minimize the corresponding loss
function under fairness constraints during training:
minimize L(θ)
subject to P (.| s = 0) = P (.| s = 1)
}
Classifier loss function. (1)
Here,thefairnessconstraintscanbereplacedwithanyfairnessrequirementthatwewant.Take
statistical parity as an example, it requires the following constraint:
Pr (ˆy = 1| s = 0) = Pr (ˆy = 1| s = 1). (2)
Inparticular,theauthorsconsidertocontrolthecovarianceCov SP (s,dθ(x )) betweentheusers’
sensitive attributes and the signed distancedθ(x ) from the users’ feature vectorx to the decision
boundary, since this distance decides the value of the predicted labelˆy.
CovSP (s,dθ(x )) = E[(s−¯s)dθ(x )]−E[(s−¯s)]¯dθ(x )≈1
N
∑
(x,s )∈DT
(s−¯s)dθ(x ) (3)
To satisfystatisticalparity,weneedtomakesurethatthesensitivefeature s isirrelevanttothe
distancedθ(x ), and thus the empirical covariance defined above needs to be approximately zero.
Therefore, we can finally get the objective function as bellow:
minimize L(θ)
subject to 1
N
∑
(x,s )∈DT (s−¯s)dθ(x )≤c
1
N
∑
(x,s )∈DT (s−¯s)dθ(x )≥−c
. (4)
Here,c∈R+isagiventhresholdtotradeofftheaccuracyandunfairnessduetostatisticalparity.
The above optimization problem is convex and the tradeoff between the classifier accuracy and
fairness constraint is Pareto-optimal. The conducted experiments that simulate statistical parity
in classification outcomes show that the fairness constraints could improve fairness but would
suffer sacrifice on accuracy [240].
5.2.3 Post-processingMethod. Post-processingmethodsfocusonmodifyingthescoreslearned
fromthebaseclassifierssothenewresultsarefair.Forexample,thepost-processingmethodscan
mitigate unfairness through learning a different decision threshold for a given scoring function
or re-weighting the features [57, 70, 101, 156, 175]. In Mehrabi et al. [152], the authors design a
post-processing bias mitigation strategy based on attention. The proposed method is flexible and
can be used for any fairness notion. First, an attention-based classifier is trained and we can get
the attention weight of each input feature. To find out the effect of each feature on the fairness
of outcomes, the authors zero out or reduce the attention weight of each feature and measure the
differenceinfairnessoftheoutcomesbasedonthedesiredfairnessnotionsuchasEqualizedOdds.
If the difference on classification accuracy is small but the difference on fairness is large, then
it indicates that this feature is mostly responsible for unfairness, and it may need to be dropped
to mitigate unfairness through reducing its attention weight. The authors can also control the
fairness-accuracytradeoffbydecreasingtheweightsofthefeaturesthatwillhurtfairnessoraccu-
racy, and increasing the attention weights of the features that can boost accuracy while keeping
the fairness.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:14 Y. Li et al.
The pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing methods have their own benefits and
drawbacks, and the choice of method depends on the particular requirements of the problem at
hand. In specific, the pre-processing methods may be relatively easy to implement through data
manipulationtechniques.Theyalsohavethebenefitofflexibility,sincetheycanbeappliedtoany
classificationalgorithmwithoutmodifyingtheexistingmodels.However,thepre-processingmeth-
ods may result in the loss of model performance, since they may lose some information through
modifyingthedata.Pre-processingmethodsaresuitablewhenthedatasetiseasilyaccessible,mod-
ificationsareallowedtobemadeforfairnessdemands,andwhenweneedtoadaptcurrentmodels
for fairness demands without making great changes.
In-processing methods have the pros that they can incorporate specialized fairness objectives
during model training and also provide a more flexible tradeoff between fairness and accuracy.
However,in-processingmethodssufferfromtheconsthattheymaybemorecomplextoimplement
compared with the pre- or post-processing methods, as they require modifications to the model
themselves.Moreover,astheyaredesignedforspecificaims,theyaredifficulttobegeneralizedto
other scenarios. In-processing techniques can be used when we need to build a new model from
scratch or when we have the ability to modify the model to incorporate fairness requirements.
Post-processingmethodshavethemodel-agnosticflexibilityasthepre-processingmethods.As
fairness interventions are separated from the model training, they allow independent updates
of fairness requirements. But they might not generate as good performance as pre-processing
or in-processing methods, since they are limited to change the model output probabilities. Post-
processingmethodshavethebenefitwhenthemodelisfixed;forexample,whenweusethird-party
models.
As for the evaluation of fairness, the metrics usually highly depend on the specific fairness
definition or requirement. For example, if we consider statistical parity, then we can adoptSP =
|P (ˆy = 1| s = 0)−P (ˆy = 1| s = 1)| to evaluate fairness. The datasets for studying fairness
in classification usually contain sensitive features, which have been collected and summarized
in several previous surveys such as References [153, 179]. Therefore, we would not repeat the
introductionhere, but we will presentseveral datasetsfor fair recommendation tasks in Section2.
6 FAIRNESS IN RANKING
Besidesfairnessstudiesinclassificationtask,recentworkshavealsoraisedthequestionoffairness
in rankings. Recommendation algorithms can usually be considered as a type of ranking problem.
Therefore,thefairnessstudiesinrankingisprettyenlighteningtoimprovefairnessinrecommen-
dations. However, the existing works of fair ranking usually only consider unfairness issue from
the item side, i.e., the candidates to be ranked, while the concept of fairness in recommender sys-
tems has been extended to multiple stakeholders [35]. In this section, we aim to briefly introduce
the research on fair ranking and then focus on fairness in recommendation beginning from the
next section.
6.1 Fairness Concerns
There are two main types of ranking task:Score-based Rankingand Learning to Rank[243]. The
differencebetweenscore-basedrankingandlearningtorankishowtoobtainthescoreforranking.
Inscore-basedranking,thescorecanbedirectlycomputedfromagivenfunction,whileinlearning
torank,thescoreisestimatedbytrainingamodelfromthepreference-enrichedtrainingexamples.
Todiscussthefairnessworksfromamachinelearningview,wefocusontalkingaboutthefairness
studies in learning to rank problem.
Inthesupervisedlearningtoranktask,asetofcandidatesisgivenas {c1,c2,... cn},whereeach
candidate is described by a set of featuresX, which may include sensitive featuresS. The goal
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:15
of a ranking algorithm is to generate a ranking listl that sorts the candidates by their predicted
relevance to the search query. The highest-scoring candidates will appear closer to the top of the
list and get the most exposure. We typically return the best-rankedK candidates to construct a
top-K ranking list. A majority of the existing works on fair ranking focus on list-wise definitions
forfairness,whichmeansthatthefairnessmeasuresdependontheentirelistofresultsforagiven
query.Aswementionedabove,thereisalsonouniversalfairnessmeasureinrankingtasksdueto
the complex system environment and goals. The fairness notions proposed in classification tasks
maybeadoptedinrankingtaskswithsomeadditionaltask-specificconsiderations.Generally,the
fairness definitions in ranking can also be classified into group and individual fairness. However,
in this survey, we talk about the taxonomy of fairness in ranking from a more task-specific per-
spective: Probability-based FairnessandExposure/Attention-based Fairness[170,243].
6.1.1 Probability-based Fairness. The probability-based fairness notions in ranking usually re-
quire a minimum/maximum number or proportion of the protected candidates in the top-K rank-
ing list [15,42, 91,241]. For example, in Reference [42], the fairness is required as:
Lkℓ ≤
∑
1≤j≤k
∑
i∈Pℓ
xij ≤Ukℓ, (5)
where x is a binary assignment matrix andxij = 1 if itemi is assigned to positionj.T h eu p p e r
and lower boundUkℓ,Lkℓ ∈Z≥0 guarantees that a certain number of items with propertyℓ ap-
pear in the top-K positions of the ranking. It is worth mentioning that probability-based fairness
definitions are proposed for achieving group fairness goals.
6.1.2 Exposure/Attention-basedFairness. AnothertypeoffairnessdefinitioninrankingisExpo-
sureorAttention-basedFairness[ 65,160,195,242].Infairrankingtask,afrequentlystudiedprob-
lem is how to distribute the exposure opportunity to candidates fairly, since the total exposure of
candidatesisalimitedresource.Thecompetitionofexposurecomesfromthewell-knownissuein
ranking:thepositionbias[ 59],whichmeansthattheexpectedexposureofcandidatesorattention
from users will reduce significantly as the ranking position increases, and thus a slight difference
inestimatedrelevancecouldresultinalargedifferenceinitemexposures.Insuchsetting,thefair-
nessmetricsareusuallyrelevanttotheexposureofthecandidatesbelongingtodifferentgroups,so
the average exposure of groups can be controlled to be proportional to their average relevance to
the search query. Different from probability-based fairness notions, the exposure/attention-based
fairness can quantify not only group fairness [160, 195], but also individual fairness [23, 32]a c -
cording to specific formalization. Group fairness can be measured through the difference of the
average exposure between different groupsG1 andG2 [243]:
F (G1,G2 ) = /barex/barex/barex/barex
1
|G1|
∑
c∈G1
Exposure(c)−1
|G2|
∑
c∈G2
Exposure(c)/barex/barex/barex/barex.
Similarly, individual unfairness can be measured through the difference of exposure between
two candidatesc1 andc2 [243]:
F (c1,c2 ) =|Exposure(c1 )−Exposure(c2 )|.
6.2 Methods
In this section, we introduce the methods for achieving fairness in ranking. Similarly, we also
follow the order of pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing. The majority of works of
fairrankingadoptin-processingandpost-processingmethods.Theadvantagesanddisadvantages
of the three types in ranking are similar, as we discussed in Section3.3. In this section, we follow
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:16 Y. Li et al.
thenotationsofeachpaperandexplainthenotionssoreaderscaneasilyreferenceandunderstand
them.
6.2.1 Pre-processingMethod. Pre-processingmethodsseektomitigatebiasintrainingdata,so
themodelstrainedfromtheunbiaseddatawillbefair[ 123,198].Forexample,inLahotietal.[ 123],
authors introduce a method for mapping user records into a low-rank representation that recon-
ciles individual fairness through pre-processing. Specifically, given two samplesxi andxj, and let
ususe x∗
i andx∗
j todenotetheirrepresentationswithonlynon-sensitivefeatures.Themethodaims
to learn a mapping functionϕso the individuals who are indistinguishable on their non-sensitive
featuresx∗in data should also be indistinguishable in their transformed representations˜x under
a given distance functiond:
/barex/barex/barexd
(
ϕ(xi ),ϕ
(
xj
))
−d
(
x∗
i,x∗
j
)/barex/barex/barex≤ϵ.
Tothisend,theproblemisformalizedasaprobabilisticclusteringproblem.Specifically,weaim
forK clusters,eachgivenintheformofaprototypevector vk withk = 1··· K.Everysample xi is
assigned to a cluster according to a probability distributionui, which reflects the distance of the
samplexi from prototypes. Here, theuik represents the probability ofxi belonging to the cluster
of prototypevk. Therefore, the representation˜xi is given by:
˜xi =ϕ(xi ) =
∑
k=1···K
uik ·vk.
To ensure the utility of any downstream application, we can optimize the utility objective
through minimizing the data loss induced byϕ:
Lutil (X, ˜X ) =
M∑
i=1
∥xi−˜xi∥2 =
M∑
i=1
N∑
j=1
(xij −˜xij )2.
Furthermore, to reduce individual unfairness in data, we also need to optimize the fairness ob-
jective as:
Lfair (X, ˜X ) =
∑
i,j=1...M
(d ( ˜xi, ˜xj )−d (x∗
i,x∗
j ))2.
The final objective combines the utility loss and fairness loss above as:
L = λ·Lutil (X, ˜X ) +μ·Lfair (X, ˜X ),
whereλandμarehyper-parameters,andtheobjectivecanbeoptimizedthroughgradientdescent.
Thetransformedrepresentationreconcilesindividualfairnessandcanbeincorporatedintoavari-
etyoftaskssuchasclassificationandlearning-to-rank.Experimentsonlearning-to-rankshowthat
theproposedmethodsachievebestindividualfairnessbutworseutilitythanbaselinemodels[ 123].
6.2.2 In-processing Method. Most of the works on fair ranking adopt in-processing methods,
which aim to directly learn a fair ranking model from scratch [164, 196, 242]. For example,
Narasimhanetal.[ 164]studytheproblemoflearningpairwisefairnessforranking.Supposethere
are queriesS drawn i.i.d. from an underlying distributionD, each candidate to be ranked for an-
swering the query is associated with a vectorx∈X and a labely∈Y. For example,Y may take
the value of 1 or 0 to represent whether the result is clicked by a user. The ranking algorithm
needs to learn a scoring functionf : X →R for sorting the candidates. Suppose there is a set
of K groupsG1,··· ,GK and each example belongs to exactly one group. The authors define the
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:17
group-dependent pairwise accuracyAGi >Gj as the probability of a clicked candidate from group
Gi being ranked above another relevant unclicked candidate from groupGj:
AGi >Gj := P
(
f (x )> f (x′)| y>y′, (x,y)∈Gi, (x′,y′)∈Gj
)
, (6)
where (x,y) and (x′,y′) are drawni.i.d. from the distribution of examples. The cross-group pair-
wise equal opportunity is defined as:
AGi >Gj =κ, for someκ∈[0,1] for alli/nequalj. (7)
Thetrainingproblemcanbeformulatedasmaximizingtheoverallpairwiseaccuracyunderthe
cross-group equal opportunity fairness constraint:
max
f∈F
AUC(f )
s.t. AGi >Gj (f )−AGk >Gl (f )≤ϵ∀i/nequalj,k/nequall,
(8)
where AUC(f ) is the overall pairwise accuracy andF is the class of models we are interested in.
Experimentresultsshowthattheproposedmethodcangreatlyreducethefairnessviolationatthe
cost of a lower test AUC. The paper claims that their algorithm can be applied to any pairwise
metric.
6.2.3 Post-processing Method. Post-processing methods usually re-rank candidates in the out-
putlistofthebaserankingmodels[ 23,140,241].Forexample,SinghandJoachims[ 195]studythe
problemoffairexposureinrankings.Theyconsiderthesettingwheretherelevanceofdocuments
has beenobtainedor wellestimatedfrom some baserankers,andtheyonlyask how to fairly allo-
cate exposure in rankings based on the known relevance. For a given single queryq, the ranking
algorithm aims to present a rankingr of a set of documentsD ={d1,d2,d3··· dN}. The utility of
a rankingr for queryq is denoted as U(r|q). The authors propose to optimize the ranking task
underfairnessconstraintssothelearnedranking r maximizestheutilityfunctionandfairness.To
learn the distribution of the rankingr, the authors learn a probabilistic ranking matrixP where
Pi,j is the probability thatr places documentdi at rankj. Here, we need both the sum of proba-
bilities for each position and the sum of probabilities for each document to be 1, i.e.,∑
i Pi,j = 1
and∑
j Pi,j = 1. Therefore, the problem of optimal fair ranking can be formulated as finding the
utility-maximizing probabilistic rankingP under fairness constraints:
P = argmaxP U(r|q) (expected utility)
s.t. 1T P = 1T (sum of probabilities for each position)
P1 = 1 (sum of probabilities for each document)
0≤Pi,j ≤1 (valid probability)
Pis fair (fairness constraints)
. (9)
The proposed method is able to achieve various fairness notions in ranking depending on spe-
cific fairness requirements. Here, we also take Statistical Parity of exposure as an example. First,
the exposure for a documentdi under a probabilistic rankingP is defined as:
Exposure (di|P) =
N∑
j=1
Pi,j vj, (10)
wherevj represents the importance of positionj and the exposure for a groupGk is the average
exposure of each document inGk:
Exposure (Gk|P) = 1
|Gk|
∑
di∈Gk
Exposure (di|P). (11)
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:18 Y. Li et al.
Based on this, the Statistical Parity constraint requires that:
Exposure (G0|P) = Exposure (G1|P). (12)
After derivation and simplification in this article, the fairness constraint can be plugged into
the linear program to solve. The experiments show that the effect of statistical parity in ranking
is similar to its effect in classification, where it can also lead to a drop of accuracy.
Thepre-,in-,andpost-processingmethodsinrankingalsohavetheiradvantagesanddisadvan-
tages, similar to the pros, cons, and suitable application scenarios we introduced in Section5.2.
As a result, the choice of methods needs careful consideration of the specific fairness demands,
task objectives, resource availability, and legal requirements. The evaluation of fairness in rank-
ing is also highly relevant to the specific fairness definition or requirement. The survey cited in
Reference [243] summarized some datasets for studying fairness in ranking.
7 FAIRNESS IN RECOMMENDATION
Inthissection,weintroducethedefinitions,methods,evaluation,datasets,andchallengesforfair-
ness in recommendation research. We first briefly talk about the preliminaries of recommender
systems and show several examples of unfairness in recommendation. After that, we systemati-
cally show the taxonomy of fairness notions, techniques of promoting fairness, evaluating fair-
ness, and datasets for studying fairness in recommendation. We also analyze the challenges and
opportunities in fair recommendation field to inspire more works in the future.
7.1 Preliminaries of Recommender Systems
In recommendation task, there is usually a user setU = {u1,u2,..., un} and an item setV =
{v1,v2,..., vm},w h e r en is the number of users andm is the number of items. We also have the
user-iteminteractionhistoriesrepresentedasa0-1binarymatrix H =
[
hij
]
n×m,whereeachentry
hij = 1i fu s e rui has interacted with itemvj, otherwisehij = 0. The main task for recommenda-
tionistopredictthepreferencescoresofusersover items Suv ,sothemodelcanrecommendeach
userui atop-N recommendationlist{v1,v2,..., vN|ui}accordingtothepredictedscores.Tolearn
preferencescores,modernrecommendermodelsusuallylearnuseranditemrepresentationsfrom
dataandthentaketherepresentationsasinputtoalearnedordesignedscoringfunctionstomake
recommendations.Mostofthe Collaborative Filtering (CF) [73,94,186]or Collaborative Rea-
soning (CR) [46, 48, 192] recommender systems are directly trained from user-item interaction
history.Thecontent-basedrecommendationmodels[ 9,144,250]andhybridmodels[ 34]mayalso
leverage user/item profiles as input or use additional information to help train the model. In fair
recommendation works, fairness concerns are usually relevant to user and item features such as
user gender or race and item category or popularity.
7.2 Examples of Unfairness in Recommendation
The fairness considerations can be raised from very different perspectives in recommendation
task. We show two examples of unfairness in recommendation in Figure4, one from user-side
andanotherfromitem-side.Figure 4(a)showstheunfairnessofrecommendationqualitybetween
groups of active users and inactive users in an e-commerce dataset [129]. We first sort users ac-
cording to their number of interactions in the training data. We then label the top 5% users as
active ones and leave the remaining 95% users into the inactive group. After that, we test the per-
formance of three fairness-unaware recommendation models (BiasedMF [121], a shallow model,
NeuMF [102] ,ad e e pm o d e l ,a n dS T A M P[138], a sequential model) on two user groups. We can
see that the recommendation quality (F1 score) of active users is significantly higher than those
inactive ones, which shows that the recommendation models are dominated by the active users
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:19
Fig. 4. (a) The significant difference between inactive and active user groups on recommendation quality
(image from [129]); (b) The significant exposure difference among items with close relevance scores.
and thus generate unfairness treatments for inactive users, which also degrade the overall perfor-
mance, since the inactive users are the majority. Similar phenomenon is also observed on some
other datasets [29, 180]. In addition, Figure4(b) shows the unfairness of item exposure in recom-
mendation lists. Suppose there is a set of items being recommended to a user and each item has
a learned relevance score. The recommender systems usually sort the items by their relevance
scores,andthehighlyscoreditems willappearcloserto thetopoftherecommendation list.Here,
we consider a standard exposure drop-off that is commonly used in the Discounted Cumulative
Gain measure: 1/log(1 +i) to compute the exposure of each position, wherei is the position in
thelist[ 195].Wecanseefromthefigurethatalthoughtheitemshaveverycloserelevancescores,
the exposure opportunity received by each item significantly varies, which causes unfairness of
exposure for items in recommendation. A similar example is also discussed in Reference [195].
7.3 A Taxonomy of Fairness Notions in Recommendation
In this section, we introduce the taxonomy of fairness notions in recommendation to provide
a systematic overview of the various perspectives of fairness in recommendation [132, 133]. In
Table1, we summarize the categories as well as several corresponding papers in each category. It
is worth noting that some fairness notions such as theUser Fairness,Multi-sided Fairness,a n dDy-
namicFairness mightbespecialconsiderationsinrecommendationscenarios,whilesomefairness
notionssuchas GroupFairness,IndividualFairness, andCausalFairness canbeconsideredsimilarly
in various machine learning tasks such as classification. To make a differentiation, the criterion
withstarinTable 1arethoseproposedconsideringthespecialcharacteristicsofrecommendation
tasks such as the interactivity, multi-sidedness, and dynamics, while other criterion can be con-
sidered more generally in diverse machine learning tasks. In this section, in addition to defining
each category formally, we introduce representative works of each category in recommendation.
7.3.1 GroupFairnessvs.IndividualFairness. Asweintroducedabove,groupfairnessandindivid-
ualfairnessaretwobasicframeworksinalgorithmicfairness,andthefairnessinrecommendation
can also be divided into these two categories.
•Group Fairness:Groupfairnessrequiresthatdifferentpredefinedgroupsshouldbetreated
equally.
•Individual Fairness: Individual fairness believes that similar individuals should receive
similar treatments.
Here, we introduce some representative examples for each category. Yao and Huang [236]
present four group fairness metrics in collaborative filtering recommender systems. The authors
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:20 Y. Li et al.
Table 1. The Taxonomy of Fairness Notions in Recommender Systems
Criterion Category Reference
Level Group [ 257][ 154][262][91][ 163][129][87][ 108][203][162][89][50][ 51]
Individual [ 168][ 150][131][125][ 66][134]
Subject* User [ 83][ 117][131][108][ 220][223][187][ 66][216][215][134][135]
Item [ 20][ 163][258][96][ 191][208][125][ 177][235][230][ 221][253]
Side* Single-side [ 124][ 83][258][96][ 129][131][125][ 108][220][217][215][177]
Multi-side [ 37][ 2][168][169][ 222][218][25][ 159][219][162][143][197]
Relationship Associative [ 236][ 78][257][44][ 26][125][28][ 258][215][181][45][129]
Causal [ 131][ 105][207]
State* Static [ 236][ 137][183][124][ 20][83][45][ 28][129][131][176][67]
Dynamic [ 87][ 141][11]
Duration* Short-term [ 236][ 137][183][124][ 116][20][5][ 83][6][129][131][203]
Long-term [ 30][ 87][25][141][ 76][11][89]
Granularity* Populational [30][ 83][129][87][ 261][141][96][ 215][177][219][162][11]
Personalized [131][ 223]
Transparency Blackbox [ 236][ 78][131][105][ 76][129][258][ 222][218][25][11][89]
Explainable [ 88]
Centrality* Centralized [ 124][ 117][129][131][ 108][220][257][ 154][20][91][163][96]
Federated [ 139][ 259]
consider a binary group feature such as gender to divide disadvantaged and advantaged groups,
and all proposed metrics measure a discrepancy between the prediction behavior for disadvan-
taged users and advantaged users. Li et al. [129] consider user-oriented group fairness in com-
mercial recommendation. The authors divide users into advantaged and disadvantaged groups
according to their activity, e.g., the number of user interactions in the training data, and require
that a fair recommendation algorithm should offer similar recommendation quality for different
groupsofusers.Theauthorsusethedifferenceoftheaveragerecommendationperformance(such
asF1andNDCG)betweentwogroupstomeasuretheusergroupunfairnessofarecommendation
algorithm. Results show that fairness-aware learning can achieve both better fairness on recom-
mendation quality between the two groups and better overall recommendation performance of
the system, which means that when properly treated, fairness and utility may not conflict with
eachotherandtheycansometimesbeimprovedsimultaneously.Similar resultsarealsoobserved
on more datasets and recommendation scenarios [180]. Furthermore, Rahmani et al. [180]s h o w
that the recommendation accuracy disparity among user groups may vary on different datasets.
In general, such disparity is more significant in recommendation scenarios where user behaviors
require significant marginal cost, such as e-commerce, where users really have to pay money to
purchase a product, and POI recommendation, where users have to spend travel costs (both time
and money) to check in a location. In these scenarios, the behavioral difference between advan-
taged and disadvantaged users can be more apparent due to their different ability to afford the
costs. However, such disparity can be less severe in some other recommendation scenarios such
as music recommendation, since once users have the membership, the marginal cost of listening
to a song is relatively small (just a few minutes of time). This shows that it is important to care-
fully define the user groups according to the recommendation scenario when considering group
fairness in recommendation.
Someotherworksconsiderindividualfairnessinrecommendation.Forexample,Linetal.[ 137]
study the problem of group recommendation where items are recommended to groups of users
whosepreferencescanbedifferentfromeachother.Theauthorsdefinetheindividualutilitygiven
a recommendation to the group by considering the relevance of each recommended item to the
user and treat the imbalances between group members’ utilities as the metric of fairness. Authors
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:21
maximize the satisfaction of each group member while minimizing the unfairness between
them. Li et al. [131] consider counterfactual fairness in recommendation, which requires that the
recommendation results for each user are the same in the factual and the counterfactual world.
The counterfactual world is defined as the one where user’s sensitive features were changed
while all the other features that are not causally dependent on the sensitive features remain the
same.
7.3.2 User Fairness vs. Item Fairness.As a multi-stakeholder system, fairness requirements in
recommender systems may come from different sides including but not limited to user-side and
item-side, where the user-side refers to the users who receive recommendations and item-side
refers to the items to be ranked or recommended. In some cases such as job applicant recommen-
dationforrecruiters,thejobseekersarethosetoberankedandrecommended,butwestillconsider
the fairness demands of them as item-side fairness for simplicity, since even though the job appli-
cants are human users of the job-matching system, they are the “items” to be ranked from the
recommender system’s point of view.
•User Fairness: A fair recommender system for users should treat different predefined
groups of users or similar individual users fairly.
•Item Fairness: A fair recommender system for items should treat different predefined
groups of items or similar individual items fairly.
The fairness demands from user side are usually about the quality of the recommendations for
them, while the fairness considerations from item side usually focus on the exposure opportunity
of items in the ranking lists. Here, we discuss some examples in the following. Fu et al. [83]c o n -
sider mitigating the unfairness problem for users in the context of explainable recommendation
overknowledgegraphs.Theauthorsfindthatperformancedisparityexistsbetweenactiveandin-
active user groups and claim that such disparity may come from the different distribution of path
diversity. Wu et al. [215] investigate the problem that big recommendation models are unfair to
cold-start users. Specifically, the authors observe that the recommendation accuracy of cold-start
users is sacrificed during the process of optimizing the overall performance of big recommenda-
tion models. The authors proposed a self-distillation approach to encourage the model to fairly
capture the interest distributions of both cold-start and active users. Compared with the works
considering user-side fairness, some other research focus on item-side fairness. One typical prob-
lem of item fairness in recommendation is to mitigate the exposure unfairness, which is usually
due to popularity bias, i.e., the popular items may get disproportionately more exposure opportu-
nity,sincetheydominatetheembeddinglearninginrecommendersystems,whilethelesspopular
itemsmaygetmuchlessexposureopportunityeventhoughtheyhaveequallygoodorevenbetter
quality.Theexposureunfairnessissueisoftensolvedbyincreasingthenumberofunpopularitems
(long-tail items) or otherwise the overall catalog coverage in the recommendation list, or making
surethattheexposurerateofitemsisproportionaltotheirquality[ 3,4,8,115].Anotherexample
of item-side fairness in recommendation is Reference [20], which proposes the notion of pairwise
fairness in recommendation. The authors measure item fairness based on pairwise comparisons
and require that the likelihood of a clicked item being ranked above another relevant unclicked
item should be the same across different item groups, conditioned on that the items have been
engaged with the same amount.
7.3.3 Single-sideFairnessvs.Multi-sideFairness. Sincetheconceptoffairnessinrecommender
systemshasbeenextendedtomultiplestakeholders[ 35],itisnotsatisfactorytomeetthefairness
demands of only user side or item side, and thus an important problem is how to balance the
fairness demands of multiple sides.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:22 Y. Li et al.
•Single-side Fairness: A single-side fair recommender system only considers fairness de-
mands from one single side, being either user-side, item-side, or platform-side.
•Multi-side Fairness: A multi-side fair recommender system considers fairness demands
from multiple sides at the same time.
Therefore,besidesthesingle-sidefairnessconsiderationsaswementionedabove,severalworks
study multi-side fairness in recommender systems. Both References [35] and [2] present several
most commonly observed classes of multi-stakeholder recommendation and categorize different
types of fairness that are important to address in a multi-stakeholder recommendation environ-
ment. Patro et al. [168] address individual fairness for both producers and customers. From the
item-side, authors require to reduce the exposure inequality among items, and from the user-side,
authorsarguethattheplatformsshouldfairlydistributethelossinutilityamongallthecustomers.
Specifically,theauthorsformulatetheproblemasanallocationproblemthatguaranteesminimum
exposure for the items andenvy-free up to one item (EF-1) [33] for the users. Here, the EF-1
ensures that every user values his or her allocation at least as much as any other agent’s alloca-
tionafterhypotheticallyremovingthemostvaluableitemfromtheotheragent’sallocatedbundle.
Patro et al. [169] study the scenario where the online recommendation algorithms are updated
frequently to improve user utility. The authors argue for incremental updates of the platform
algorithms to avoid the abrupt change of item exposures. To ensure the fairness for two-sided
platforms,theauthorsproposeanonlineoptimizationmethodtoachievesmoothtransitionofthe
itemexposureswhileguaranteeingaminimumutilityforeverycustomer.Fromtheitemside,the
authors require a minimal difference between the exposure distribution in the new system and
that in the old system, while for the user side, the authors define a platform to be fair for the cus-
tomers if it guarantees a minimum utility for everyone. Liu et al. [143] propose a fairness-centric
modelanddesignexplicitandimplicitdiscriminatorstomitigatethepopularitybiasfromboththe
useranditemsidelocallyandglobally.Theextensiveexperimentsshowthattheproposedmethod
achieves the best fairness performance while maintaining the competitive model effectiveness in
recommendation.
7.3.4 Associative Fairness vs. Causal Fairness. The fairness notions in machine learning and
recommendation tasks can be proposed based on associative or causal perspectives.
•Associative Fairness: Associative fairness metrics are developed based on measuring the
associations or correlations between the predictive outcomes and the sensitive features.
•Causal Fairness: Causal fairness metrics are developed based on measuring the causal ef-
fects of the sensitive features on the predictive outcomes.
The research community first studied fairness in machine learning by developing association-
based (or correlation-based) fairness notions, with the aim to find the discrepancy of statistical
metrics between individuals or sub-populations. Up to now, most of the existing works about
fairness in recommendations consider the association-based fairness notions. For example, the
previously mentioned research cited in Reference [236], which proposes metrics to measure the
discrepancybetweenthepredictionbehaviorfordisadvantagedusersandadvantagedusersincol-
laborative filtering recommender systems. Recently, researchers have found that fairness cannot
be well assessed only based on association notion [118, 122, 246, 247], since they cannot reason
aboutthecausalrelationsamongfeatures.However,unfairtreatmentsusuallyresultfromacausal
relation between the sensitive features (e.g., gender) and model decisions (e.g., admission). There-
fore,researchershaveproposedcausal-basedfairnessnotions[ 122,226]tostudyunfairnessissues
in machine learning more properly. Unlike the association-based notions that are only computed
basedondata,thecausal-basedfairnessnotionsalsoconsidertheadditionalstructuralknowledge
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:23
of the system regarding how variables propagate on a causal model (e.g., a causal graph) [148].
The causal-based fairness notions are usually defined in terms of interventions and counterfac-
tuals [171]. The non-observable properties of interventions and counterfactuals bring great chal-
lenges to the applicability of causal-based notions in the real world, since sometimes they cannot
be easily computed from observational data [148]. Two main frameworks are proposed to solve
the problem: one is known as the potential outcome framework [107], which usually estimates
the causal quantities through re-weighting and matching techniques; another is known as the
structural causal model [171], which tells how to estimate causal quantities through observable
data under identifiability criterion [194]. Li et al. [131] aim to achieve counterfactual fairness in
recommender systems. The authors define counterfactually fair recommendation as the recom-
mendation results that are the same in factual and counterfactual world for each possible user. In
the paper, the counterfactual world could be the one where user’s sensitive features are changed,
for example, the gender of a user is changed from male to female, while all other insensitive fea-
tures that are not causally dependent on sensitive features remain the same. Compared with the
classification problem, causality in fair recommendation has been rarely studied. Since it is now
widelyacceptedthatcausal-basednotionsareimportanttobeconsideredtoenhancefairness[ 148],
we believe causality considerations will open up new challenges and opportunities for studying
fairness in recommendation.
7.3.5 StaticFairnessvs.DynamicFairness. Inrecommendationtasks,fairnesscanbeconsidered
from a static perspective or dynamic perspective.
•Static Fairness: A static fair recommender system considers achieving fairness in a static
environment where user preferences and item properties are assumed to be unchanging
during the whole recommendation process.
•Dynamic Fairness: A dynamic fair recommender system considers achieving fairness in
a dynamic environment where the user preferences and item properties may change with
time during the recommendation process.
Mostoftheexistingworksaboutfairnessinrecommendationconsiderstaticfairnesswherethe
recommendation environment is fixed during the recommendation process and usually provide a
one-timefairnesssolutionbasedonfairness-constrainedoptimization.Forexample,Lietal.[ 129]
divide users into advantaged and disadvantaged groups based on their activity and propose a re-
ranking method to mitigate the performance disparity between the two groups. The user activity
levelisassumedtobeunchangedandfixedduringtherecommendationprocess.However,recom-
mendersystemsareusuallydynamicsystems,sinceusersconstantlyinteractwithitems;asaresult,
a previously inactive user may now become active while a previously unpopular item may now
become popular and vice versa [149]. What is more, researches have shown that imposing static
fairness criteria myopically at every step may actually exacerbate unfairness [60,62,213,249]. To
solve the problem, a few works have paid attention to the dynamic factors in the recommender
systemenvironmentandstudyhowtoenhancefairnesswithdynamicssuchasthechangeofutil-
ity, attributes, and group labels due to the user interactions throughout the recommendation pro-
cess[244].Geetal.[ 87]studythedynamicfairnessofitemexposureinrecommendersystems.The
itemsareseparatedintoadvantagedanddisadvantagedgroupsbasedonitempopularity.However,
the item popularity may change during the recommendation process based on the recommenda-
tionstrategyanduserfeedback,causingtheunderlyinggrouplabelstochangeovertime.Tosolve
the challenge, the authors formulate the problem as aConstrained Markov Decision Process
(CMDP)bydynamicallyconstrainingthefairnessofitemexposureateachiteration.Liuetal.[ 141]
study the task ofInteractive Recommender Systems (IRS), where items are recommended to
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:24 Y. Li et al.
users consecutively and the user feedback is received during the process. IRS gradually refine the
recommendation policy according to the obtained user feedback in an online manner and aim to
maximizethetotalutilityoverthewholeinteractionperiod.Duringtherecommendationprocess,
the user preferences and the system’s fairness status constantly change over time. To resolve this
problem,theauthorsproposeareinforcementlearning-basedframework,whichjointlyrepresents
theuserpreferencesandthesystem’sfairnessstatusintothestatesofthe Markov Decision Pro-
cess (MDP) for recommendation, so they can dynamically achieve a long-term balance between
accuracy and fairness in IRS.
7.3.6 Short-termFairnessvs.Long-termFairness. Thefairnessofrecommendersystemscanalso
be considered from short-term or long-term fairness requirements.
•Short-term Fairness:Ashort-termfairrecommendersystemonlyconsidersachievingfair-
ness at present.
•Long-term Fairness: A long-term fair recommender system considers achieving fairness
in the long run.
The short-term fairness is usually a static fairness, since it only needs to consider the current
status and achieve fairness for one time. The dynamic fairness can be seen as a type of long-
term fairness, since the dynamics usually occur in the long run. However, the long-term fairness
covers a broader scope, such as the case where there are no dynamics but the fairness cannot be
realizedinthepresentandcanonlybeaddressedbyalong-termstrategy.Forexample,Borgesand
Stefanidis [30] consider to achieve the individual exposure fairness for items. In recommendation
task, items are presented as an ordered list. For items with very close or equal relevance scores,
thealgorithmneedstoarrangetheminaproperorder.However,usersusuallypaymoreattention
to the top positions of the list, and the level of attention significantly decreases as the position in
the ranking gets lower. In such case, individual exposure fairness (i.e., items with close relevance
scores get similar amounts of exposure) cannot be achieved within just one search result due to
the limited positions and can only be achieved in the long term by changing the position of items
in multiple rounds of ranking to achieve fairness in expectation. Specifically, the authors require
that the ranked items receive exposure that is proportional to their relevance scores in a series of
rankings through an amortized manner.
7.3.7 PopulationalFairnessvs.PersonalizedFairness. Mostfairnessdefinitionsconsiderfairness
on populational level, which aims to achieve the same fairness definition for all users. However,
users’ fairness demands can be very personalized. For example, some users may be very sensitive
on gender and they want to be fairly treated on the gender feature, while some other users may
not care about gender too much but instead they are very sensitive to age and they do not want
to be discriminated by age.
•Populational Fairness: Populational fairness considers the same fairness demand for all
the individuals or predefined groups in the whole population.
•Personalized Fairness:Personalizedfairnessconsidersdifferentandpersonalizedfairness
demands of individuals or predefined groups in the population.
Itisimportanttounderstandthatpopulationalvs.personalizedfairnessisdifferentfromgroup
vs. individual fairness.The group vs. individual fairness dimension emphasizes whetherusers are
treated as a group or individually, while populational vs. personalized fairness dimension empha-
sizes whether users have the right to tell the system what fairness consideration that they care
about rather than what the system designer cares about. More specifically, a system guarantees
individual fairness does not necessarily mean that it provides personalized fairness—it could be
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:25
populational. For example, the system may globally apply the same individual fairness such as
counterfactual gender fairness to all users, even though some users do not care about gender fair-
ness but care about age fairness instead. Similarity, a system guarantees group fairness does not
necessarily mean that it is populational fairness—it could be personalized. For example, the sys-
temmaysplitusersintotwogroupsandguaranteethattheaverageusersatisfactionofgroupone
is fair compared to that of group two, meanwhile, the fairness of each user is defined based on
the user’s own provided feature. Bose and Hamilton [31] introduced compositional fairness for
multiple sensitive attribute combinations for the knowledge graph embedding task. Li et al. [131]
further defined personalized fairness based on causal notion for the collaborative filtering recom-
mendationtask.Thesystemguaranteespersonalizedcounterfactualfairnessforeachuser,i.e.,the
user’s recommendation result is unchanged even if the personalized sensitive features that the
user cares about were changed in a counterfactual world. For example, if the user does not want
to be discriminated by the recommender system on his or her age, then the system can guarantee
that the recommendations (such as news articles) are age-neutral or age-diverse. Wu et al. [223]
furtheradvancedfrompersonalizedfairnesstopersonalizedselectivefairnessinrecommendation,
whichprovidesuserswiththeflexibilitytoselectthesensitivefeature(s)thattheycareaboutafter
the recommendation model is trained, and thus users can freely re-select the sensitive feature(s)
that they care about when they want.
7.3.8 Blackbox Fairness vs. Explainable Fairness.Most fairness in recommendation research fo-
cusesondefiningfairnessanddevelopingmethodstoimprovethefairness.However,anevenmore
fundamental problem is to understand why a model is unfair.
•Blackbox Fairness: Blackbox fairness models aim to develop methods to enhance fairness
without trying to explain or understand the reasons of unfairness.
•Explainable Fairness: Explainable fairness models focus more on how to understand the
reasons that lead to unfair model outputs.
There has been research on explaining recommendation results [52, 90, 201, 228, 251, 252], ex-
plaining graph neural networks [145, 200, 227, 238, 239], explaining vision and language mod-
els[58,97,103,127,128],andsoon,buttheresearchonexplainingwhyamodelisfairorunfairis
still very limited. Understanding the “why” is not only helpful on technical perspectives but also
on social perspectives. Technically, knowing the reasons of unfairness helps system designers to
conductdatacurationtoremovethefactorsthatleadtounfairnessandalsohelpsthemtodevelop
targeted models for disparity mitigation. Socially, knowing the reasons of unfairness helps pol-
icymakerstounderstandthesocialcausesandimplicationsofunfairnessanddevelopprevention
policies for future improvements. Explainable fairness is especially important for recommender
systems, because recommendation algorithms usually work with a huge amount (thousands or
even millions) of both latent and explicit features in a collaborative learning way. In many other
intelligent decision-making systems such as loan approval and school admission, the total num-
ber of features is much smaller than recommender systems, and most importantly, it is usually
straightforward for policy makers to know which feature(s) are sensitive that should be excluded
fromdecision-makingtoguaranteefairness,suchasgenderandrace.However,recommendersys-
temsaredifferent:Ononehand,thehugeamountoffeaturesmakesitdifficulttomanuallyidentify
thesensitivefeaturesthatleadtounfairness;ontheotherhand,mostfeaturesarenotimmediately
related to commonly known sensitive features such as race and gender but they still implicitly
influence the model fairness; finally, even if the recommendation algorithm does not use explicit
features at all and only uses user behaviors for model training, it may still result in unfair recom-
mendationsduetocollaborativelearning,sincesomeusers’preferencesandchoiceswillinfluence
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:26 Y. Li et al.
other users’ received recommendations. As a result, explainable fairness methods are highly de-
manded in recommender systems that can help to detect and explain why a model is unfair and
h o wt oi m p r o v e .G ee ta l .[88] aim to develop explainable fairness models for recommendation.
The authors take item exposure fairness as an example and develop a counterfactual explainable
fairnessframeworktoexplainwhichitemfeaturesinthesystemsignificantlyinfluencethemodel
fairness. By reducing the influence of the detected sensitive features, the model is able to achieve
better fairness-utility tradeoff in recommendation.
7.3.9 Centralized Fairness vs. Federated Fairness.Another taxonomy of fairness in recommen-
dation is theCentralized Fairnessand Federated Fairness.
•Centralized Fairness: Centralized fairness develops a central algorithm that has access to
all users’ data when trying to improve the fairness of the system.
•Federated Fairness: Federated fairness develops a decentralized algorithm that improves
the fairness of the system without accessing all of the users’ data; instead, each user’s data
is kept on the user’s local device.
Recommendation accuracy is largely related to the level of details about the collected user
information. As a typical example, in the user cold-start recommendation scenario where the
system has no previous records of the new user, the recommender system would benefit from
transferring user knowledge from other sources to make a more accurate prediction. However,
this raises privacy concerns [24, 110] for users and has motivated the recent research on
federated recommender systems (FedRec) [12, 13, 82, 99, 136, 234]. Specifically, federated
recommendation introduces theFederated Learning (FL) scheme [151] into the optimization
of recommender systems. User data is maintained on the edge devices without being uploaded
to the cloud server and thus guarantees user privacy. The federated learning framework trains
the recommendation model in a distributive manner with user edge devices as clients. However,
the federated learning paradigm also brings new challenges for fairness in recommendation. On
one hand, some existing fairness objectives in recommendation, especially user-based fairness
objectives, may have an intrinsic conflict with horizontal federated learning [139, 256]—while
the evaluation and optimization of user fairness usually involve the collection of sensitive user
features (e.g., gender, age, and sexual orientation), the federated learning framework wants to
protect this information. To overcome this conflict, one may have to relax or transform the
fairness objective or design a privacy protection module for the user feature to accommodate the
federatedrecommendersystem[ 139].Ontheotherhand,recentresearchworkshavealsopointed
out that the federated system itself may introduce the collaboration fairness issue [142, 256],
which emphasizes the equalized contribution between participants. This fair federated learning
problemhasbeenstudiedinsomefederatedlearningresearchfieldssuchashealthcare,computer
vision,andnaturallanguageprocessing,andZhouetal.[ 256]providedasurveyonthisemerging
topic. In contrast, the research on fairness of federated recommender systems is still very
limited [139].
7.4 Methods
Several methods have been proposed to mitigate unfairness in recommendation. The research on
fair recommendation usually first defines the fairness metrics they concern and then develops
suitable techniques to promote the corresponding metrics. The relevant techniques are diverse
and can be very different under different research and fairness definitions. However, we try to
organize them into several categories in this section and show some typical and common-used
methods in each category to help readers better understand how fairness is technically achieved.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:27
7.4.1 Regularization and Constrained Optimization. So far, the techniques for promoting fair-
ness in recommendation are mainly in the form of regularization and constrained optimization.
Thevariousfairnesscriteriacanbeformulatedasregularizersorconstraintstoguidetheprocessof
modeloptimization[ 20,36,78,129,137,236,237,257].Theobjectivecanbemaximizingtheutility
of recommendation under fairness constraints [236] or maximizing fairness requirements under
utility bounds [257] or jointly optimizing both fairness and utility goals with a reasonable trade-
off [85]. Existing works usually apply regularization or constraint optimization to in-processing
methods [20, 236] and post-processing methods [91, 129]. The challenges for regularization and
constrained optimization methods are that they are often non-convex in nature and are difficult
to balance the conflicting constraints, which may result in unstable training [41]. A very clear
example is Reference [236]. The authors propose four new unfairness metrics for preference
prediction in collaborative filtering-based recommendation, all measuring the discrepancy on
predictionqualitybetweenthedisadvantagedusersandadvantagedusers.Thedisadvantagedand
advantagedusersaredividedbasedonabinarygroupfeaturesuchasgender.LetususeE д[r]j and
E¬д[r]j todenotetheaverageratingsforthe jthitemfromthedisadvantagedandadvantagedusers,
respectively.Eд[y]j andE¬д[y]j denotetheaveragepredictedscoreforthe jthitemfromdisadvan-
tagedusersandadvantagedusers,respectively.Weshowthefirstfairnessmetric ValueUnfairness
here as an example, and it measures the inconsistency in signed estimation error across user
groups as:
Uval = 1
n
n∑
j=1
/barex/barex/barex
(
Eд[y]j−Eд[r]j
)
−
(
E¬д[y]j−E¬д[r]j
)/barex/barex/barex.
To promote fairness in recommendation, the learning objective of recommendation task is ex-
tendedwith a smoothedvariationof thefairness metrics.For example, theouter absolutevalue is
replaced with the squared difference. All the four fairness metrics have straightforward subgradi-
ents and can be optimized by various subgradient optimization techniques. The authors solve the
problem for a local minimum as follows:
min
θ
LRec (θ) +U.
Other examples include Reference [20], where the authors propose to measure fairness based
onpairwisecomparisonsandofferaregularizertoencourageimprovingthismetricduringmodel
trainingandthusimprovefairnessintheresultingrankings;inReference[ 137],theauthorsstudy
unfairness issue in group recommendation, where items are recommended for a group of users
whosepreferencescanbedifferentfromeachother.Severalfairnessmetricsareproposedforgroup
recommendationscenario.Theproblemisformulatedasamultipleobjectiveoptimizationproblem
with the fairness metric as a regularizer and is solved from the perspective of Pareto Efficiency.
7.4.2 Adversary Learning. Another typical technique to promote fairness is to take advantage
of adversary learning [14, 18, 22, 31, 68, 71, 74, 206, 229]. The basic idea of mitigating unfairness
through adversary learning is to learn fair representations through a min-max game between the
maintaskpredictorandanadversarialclassifier.Thepredictoraimstolearninformativerepresen-
tationsfortherecommendationtask,whilethegoaloftheadversarialclassifieristominimizethe
predictor’sabilitytopredictthesensitivefeaturesfromtherepresentations,andthustheinforma-
tion about sensitive features is removed from the representations to mitigate discrimination. For
example,letusconsider LRec todenotethelossoftherecommendationtasksuchasthepair-wise
ranking loss [182] or the mean squareerror loss [121].LA denotes the loss of theadversarialclas-
sifierforsensitivefeature S,whichcanbeacross-entropylossforimplementation.Theadversary
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:28 Y. Li et al.
learning loss can be as follows:
L =
∑
(u,v )∈D
(
LRec (u,v,yuv )−λ·LA (u,S )
)
, (13)
where the adversarial coefficientλcontrols the tradeoff between recommendation performance
andfairness.Anadvantageofadversaryapproachesisthattheyoftentreatthepredictionmodelas
ablack-boxtoofferthemodel-agnosticflexibility.However,theadversaryapproachesareusually
difficult to train and lack stability [21, 81]. Beigi et al. [18] build a recommendation model with
attributeprotectiontocounterprivate-attributeinferenceattacksinrecommendation.Theauthors
solve the problem through adversarial learning with two main components: the private attribute
inferenceattackerandtheBayesianpersonalizedrecommender.Thegoaloftheattackeristoinfer
user private-attribute information, while the recommender aims to learn users’ interests under
the regularization of the attacker. Wu et al. [217] propose a fairness-aware approach based on
decomposedadversariallearningfornewsrecommendationtomitigatetheunfairnessbroughtby
the biases of user-sensitive features. The proposed method decomposes user embedding into two
parts: a bias-aware user embedding to capture the bias information on sensitive features and a
bias-freeuserembeddingformakingfairness-awarenewsranking.Adversarylearningisusedfor
removing the bias information of sensitive features from user embeddings.
7.4.3 Reinforcement Learning. Some researches believe that recommendation is not only a
prediction problem but a sequential decision problem and suggest to model the recommendation
problem as an MDP and solve the problem throughReinforcement Learning (RL) [10]. Some
research on fairness in recommendation also follows the trend and considers RL methods to pro-
mote fairness through a long-term and dynamic perspective [87, 89, 105, 109, 141, 211–213, 244].
In Reference [87], the authors consider the dynamic item exposure fairness in recommender
systems where the item popularity will change over time with recommendation actions and user
feedback. The problem is formulated as a Constrained Markov Decision Process by dynamically
constraining the item exposure fairness metric at each iteration. In Reference [89], the authors
study the problem of Pareto-optimal fairness-utility tradeoff in recommendation and propose
a framework based on multi-objective reinforcement learning to learn a single parametric
representation for optimal recommendation policies over the space of all possible preferences.
In Reference [141], the authors study the problem of interactive recommender systems. Consid-
ering that the user preferences and the system fairness status are constantly changing over time,
the authors jointly represent the user preferences and the system’s fairness status into the states
of the MDP recommendation model through an RL framework to achieve long-term fairness
dynamically. One challenge of leveraging RL to promote fairness is that there may be a risk of
“user tampering” [75], which is a phenomenon that a recommender system may try to increase
itslong-termuserengagementthroughmanipulatingtheuser’sopinions,preferences,andbeliefs
via its recommendations. The potential unfairness of users that different users are affected by
different manipulation needs vigilance from researchers and system developers [244].
7.4.4 CausalMethods. Causalmethodsforpromotingfairnesshavebeenwidelystudiedinclas-
sificationtasks[ 54,84,92,119,122,161,225]andhavealsorecentlybeenappliedtothefieldofrec-
ommendation. The key objective of causal methods is to investigate the relationships underlying
thedataandmodel,includingthecausaleffectsbetweensensitivevariablesanddecisionsaswellas
thedependencybetweensensitiveandnon-sensitivevariables.Forexample,Wuetal.[ 224]study
causal-based anti-discrimination method in ranking problem. The authors build a causal graph
to identify and remove both direct and indirect discrimination in ranked data and reconstruct a
fair ranking if discrimination is detectedfrom the causal graph; Zheng et al. [255] leverage causal
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:29
inference to solve popularity bias in recommendation. The authors assume that the user click
behavior depends on both their interest and the item popularity. To mitigate the effect of popu-
larity bias, the authors propose a general framework to disentangle user interest and popularity
bias through learning two types of embeddings: interest embedding and popularity embedding.
The final recommendations are generated by only the interest embeddings so the popularity bias
is removed; Huang et al. [105] study how to achieve counterfactual fairness for users in online
recommendation through incorporating causal inference into bandits. The authors adopt soft in-
tervention to model the arm selection strategy and use the d-separation set identified from the
causal graph to develop a fair UCB algorithm, which promotes fairness through choosing arms
thatsatisfythecounterfactualfairnessconstraint.Anothercommonlyusedcausal-basedmethodis
re-weightingtheinstancesbasedon Inverse-Propensity-Scoring (IPS) techniques[184],which
areusuallyadoptedtosolvethebiasesinrecommendationsuchaspopularitybias[ 233]andselec-
tion bias [188]. The IPS methods assume that the biases are caused by the fact that treatments are
notbeingrandomlyassigned,andthustheyusetheinversepropensityofassigningthetreatment
as the sample weights to remove the bias. The IPS methods are usually convenient to implement,
butthescoreestimatormaynotproperlyhandlelargeshiftsinobservationalprobability[ 27],and
the methods are usually specifically designed for a particular problem setting. Besides improving
fairness, the causal methods can also provide model transparency in terms of how decisions are
made [104] .Ar e c e n tw o r k[88] studies the problem of how to explain which feature(s) lead to
item exposure unfairness in recommendation through counterfactual reasoning. Causal methods
also have challenges in practice, for example, the causal-based notions are usually defined based
on intervention and counterfactual, which are non-observable quantities and cannot always be
computedfromobservationaldata[ 148];andcausalmethodsusuallyrequirethepriorknowledge
of causal graphs or causal assumptions, which may not always be accessible in practice [185].
7.4.5 Other Methods. Several other techniques are used to promote fairness of recommenda-
tions. Examples include (1) data augmentation methods such as Reference [181], which proposes
a strategy to improve the socially relevant properties such as individual or group fairness of a
recommender system through adding antidote data. The proposed framework is developed from
an existing pre-trained matrix-factorization-based recommender system and provides the flexibil-
ity of not having to modify the original input data or recommendation algorithm. The authors
consider to add the ratings of new users to the input, which are chosen based on the correspond-
ing measure to improve the fairness of recommender systems; (2) methods based onVariational
Autoencoders (V AEs)such as Reference [30], which proposes to incorporate randomness into
the operation of VAEs to mitigate the position bias in multiple rounds of recommendation. The
authors introduce four different noise distributions and find that adding noise to the process of
sampling values from VAE’s latent representation can provide long-term fairness for recommen-
dation with an acceptable tradeoff between fairness and recommendation quality such as NDCG;
(3) methods based on self-distillation [215], which leverage the model predictions on the original
dataasateachertoregularizethepredictionsontheaugmenteddatawithrandomlydroppeduser
behaviors.Theauthorsobservethatthetrainingprocessofbigrecommendationmodelscanresult
inunfairrecommendationperformanceforcoldusersandshowthattheproposedself-distillation
method can push the model to fairly capture the interest distributions of heavy and cold users.
More techniques are used to improve fairness in other fields of machine learning [41, 205], but
their application in the recommendation scenario is very limited.
7.5 Datasets and Settings for Fairness in Recommendation Research
7.5.1 Research Datasets for Fairness in Recommendation. In this section, we collect some
datasets for fairness research in recommendation. The requirements for datasets in fairness
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:30 Y. Li et al.
Table 2. Statistics of Datasets
Dataset Sensitive Feature #Users #Items #Interactions
MovieLens gender, age and occupation 6k 3.7k 1M
Last.FM gender, age and country 120k 50M 2B
Last.FM-360K gender, age and country 359k 294k 17M
RentTheRunWay age 105k 5.8k 192k
Electronics gender 1M 9k 1M
Alibaba age and gender 49M 200M varies
Insurance gender, marital status and occupation 1k 21 5k
Post gender 500 6k 72k
Coat gender and age 290 300 11k
Sushi gender and age 5k 100 50k
Amazon item category varies varies varies
XING-Rec 17 job title, membership and location, etc 1.4M 1.3M varies
Yelp food genre 2.1M 160k 8.6M
ModCloth body shape and product size 45k 1k 100k
varies means the dataset contains multiple sub-datasets (Amazon) or multiple types of interactions (Alibaba,
XING-Rec 17), so the number may vary with different sub-datasets or prediction tasks.
research usually highly depend on the specific fairness definitions. For example, for fairness
research on user side, researchers usually need to consider fairness definitions about users’ sen-
sitive features; while for fairness research on item side, datasets with item features such as item
category may be preferred. Some works even do not consider the fairness on user/item sensitive
features but instead on user activity or item popularity, which can be directly computed from the
user interaction data, and thus they have no requirement for user/item features from the datasets.
Compared with the datasets that contain user-item interactions, recommendation datasets that
contain user/item sensitive features are very limited and uneasy to find. Therefore, we introduce
several datasets for recommendation where the user/item sensitive feature information is avail-
able.Alldatasetsarepubliclyavailableunderthereferencedlinks.Thedatastatisticsareshownin
Table2.
•MovieLens.2 This is a dataset for movie recommendation tasks with 1,000,209 anonymous
user-movie ratings. It has approximately 3,706 movies and 6,040 users with each rating
within 1 to 5. It also has a smaller version dataset with 100,000 ratings, 943 users, and 1,682
movies. There are three user-sensitive features: gender, age, and occupation.
•Last.FM.3 This is a large dataset for music retrieval and recommendation tasks [155]. It
has more than 2 billion user-music listening events, 120,322 users, 5,159,580 artists, and
50,813,373 tracks. There are three user-sensitive features: gender, age, and country.
•Last.FM- 360K.4 ThisisasmallermusicrecommendationdatasetcollectedfromtheLast.fm
website[43].Ithas17millionrecordswith359,347usersand294,015artists.Therearethree
user-sensitive features: gender, age, and country.
•RentTheRunWay.5 This dataset contains user-clothes rental interactions [158]. It has
192,544interactions,105,508usersand5,850items.Userageisincludedasasensitivefeature.
2https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/1m/
3http://www.cp.jku.at/datasets/LFM-2b/
4http://ocelma.net/MusicRecommendationDataset/lastfm-360K.html
5https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~jmcauley/datasets.html#clothing_fit
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:31
•Electronics.6 This dataset contains user online shopping behaviors on Amazon for e-
commerce recommendation. It has 1,292,954 shopping events, 1,157,633 users, and 9,560
products. User gender information is included as a sensitive feature. Note that this gen-
der feature is from predictions rather than from user profile data. Details can be found in
Reference [204].
•Alibaba.7 This datast is from the Alibaba e-commerce platform [173], which contains user-
page interactions. It considers a recommendation scenario where a user is recommended
with 50 items per page in a ranked order. There are 49 million users and 200 million items.
Theinteractiontypesincluderequests(refreshrecommendationlists),clicks,addingtocarts,
adding to wishlists, and purchases. Age and gender information are included as sensitive
features.
•Insurance.8 This is a Kaggle dataset with the goal of recommending insurance products to
atargetuser.Ithas5,382interactions,1,231users,and21insurancepolicies.Therearethree
user-sensitive features: gender, marital status, and occupation.
•Post.9 This dataset is for post-recommendation tasks. It has 71,800 user-post interactions,
500 users, and 6,000 posts with user gender information as the sensitive feature.
•Coat.10 This dataset is collected by Schnabel et al. [188]. They hire 290 Mechanical Turkers
toselectasetofitemsamong300candidatesandaskthemtoplaceratingsonselecteditems.
Eachusercomeswith24rateditemsinthetrainingsetand16itemsinthetestingset.There
are two sensitive features: gender and age.
•Sushi.11 This dataset is collected by Kamishima [113], which includes responses of a ques-
tionnairesurveyofpreferenceinSUSHI.Itcanbeusedforratingpredictionorrankingtasks.
There are 5,000 users and 100 SUSHI candidates. This dataset contains a ranking data that
asksuserstoranktheorderofSUSHIbasedontheirpersonalpreferencesandascoringdata
that asked users to give 1 to 5 rating to the ordered food. There are two sensitive features:
gender and age.
•Amazon.12 ThisdatasetcontainsuseranditemprofilesandinteractionsfromAmazon[ 165].
The website includes many sub-datasets that contain user and item information of various
categoriesinAmazonsuchastheAmazonBeauty,Books,CDsandVinyl,andsoon,andthe
data sizes vary. Although the sensitive features from user side are limited in these datasets,
item-side fairness can be considered based on the available category information of items.
•XING-Rec 17.13 This dataset is released by XING, a career-oriented social networking site,
to support the ACM RecSys Challenge 2017 for a job recommendation task [7]. The dataset
contains 1.4M users, 1.3M items, 310M impressions, 6.9M clicks, 282k bookmarks, 118k
replies, 907k deletes, and 101k recruiter interests for the offline setting. The dataset con-
tains the user profiles such as job title, membership types, education degree, and location,
as well as item profiles such as job title, required skills, location, and so on.
•Yelp.14 This dataset contains the user reviews for restaurants. The dataset contains 2.1M
users, 160.5k businesses, and 8.6M interactions. Existing research works usually use some
6https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~jmcauley/datasets.html#market_bias
7https://github.com/rec-agent/rec-rl
8https://www.kaggle.com/mrmorj/insurance-recommendation
9https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/vatsalparsaniya/post-pecommendation
10https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~schnabts/mnar/
11https://www.kamishima.net/sushi/
12https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~jmcauley/datasets/amazon_v2/
13http://2017.recsyschallenge.com/#dataset/
14https://www.yelp.com/dataset
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:32 Y. Li et al.
subsetsoftheoriginaldatasetbasedontheirownpre-processingmethods[ 88,190,260].The
foodgenrescanbeconsideredasasensitivefeatureforitemssuchas“American,”“Japanese,”
“Italian,” and “Chinese” [260].
•ModCloth.15 Thisdatasetiscollectedfromane-commercewebsitesellingwomen’sclothing
and accessories [204]. The dataset contains 100k reviews from 45k users and 1k items. The
bodyshapesofusers,aswellastheproductsizesofitems,canbeconsideredasthesensitive
features.
7.5.2 ResearchSettingsforFairnessinRecommendation. Besidesthedatasets,wealsointroduce
thebasicexperimentalsettingsforevaluatingthefairrecommendationmethods.Itisworthnoting
that the experimental datasets, data pre-processing strategies, and evaluation metrics for fair rec-
ommendations vary a lot, depending on the specific fairness definitions, proposed methods, and
application domains. In this section, we try to provide a general overview of these components
commonly used in the evaluation of fair recommendations.
Forthebasicexperimentalsettings,researchesusuallyconsiderseveraldatasetscontaininguser
profiles, item profiles, and user-item interactions (e.g., ratings, clicks, views). Based on specific
fairness considerations, the dataset may need to contain the sensitive feature information from
user or item sides. For the data pre-processing strategies, researches usually need to handle the
missingdata throughdroppingtheN/Aor estimatingthe missingvalues basedon otheravailable
data.Forfairnessworks,thefeatureengineeringprocessneedstotakethefairnessconsiderations
into account, for example, works may need to avoid the use of sensitive features as input features
to achieve theNo Disparate Treatment[17], which seeks equality of treatment by prohibiting the
use of the sensitive features in the decision process.
For evaluation metrics, fair recommendation methods usually need to show their effectiveness
on both the accuracy metrics and fairness metrics. For accuracy metrics, the common evaluation
metrics for recommendation include NDCG, Hit Rate, Precision, Recall, and F1-score, which mea-
suretheaccuracyoftherecommendeditemscomparedtothegroundtruth.However,thefairness
metrics are closely related to what kind of fairness definitions are considered in the work; for ex-
ample, the group-level fairness can be measured by equalized odds [19], equal opportunity [101],
orstatisticalparity[ 69]difference,whiletheindividual-levelfairnesscanbemeasuredbythetreat-
mentdifferencebetweensimilar individuals[ 69].Overall,thechoiceofexperimentalsettingsand
evaluation metrics may depend on the specific fairness goals and recommendation tasks. Usually
researcherswouldadaptthesettingsandevaluationmethodsspecifictotheirfairrecommendation
approaches and datasets.
8 CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
So far, researchers have realized the importance of improving fairness in recommender systems
and have started the exploration. However, the research in this area is still very limited and many
important problems have not even been studied. In this section, we talk about some open chal-
lenges and point out some future opportunities with the hope to inspire more research works in
this area.
8.1 Lack of Consensus on Fairness Definitions
The most challenging fact in fairness research is that there is no unique consensus on fairness
definition. As we mentioned above, in essence, fairness in machine learning requires that
“equal individuals/groups should be treated equally.” However, how to determine “the equal
15https://github.com/MengtingWan/marketBias
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:33
individuals/groups” and what form of “equality treatment” is acceptable depends on the certain
circumstances.Thefairnessconsiderationsaredifferentindifferentscenarios,thebiasesthatlead
to unfairness are diverse, and the fairness demands can be put forward from several different
perspectives. The lack of consensus on fairness definition leads to a series of problems.
First, how to achieve multiple fairness requirements at the same time. Existing methods are
usually designed for achieving one particular type of fairness requirement. However, this is not
sufficient for solving the problem, since people’s demand for fairness is diverse and various bi-
ases often occur simultaneously [49]. As a result, it is imperative to explore whether it is possible
to propose a unified model to handle multiple fairness demands. Though a single solution to all
fairness problems is impossible, since it has been theoretically proven that some fairness notions
are inherently conflicting with each other and cannot be achieved at the same time [120], it is
still worth it to explore some simple scenarios such as handling two or three different cases. Fur-
thermore, it is interesting to explore the relationship between various biases and fairness notions
and clarify whether we really need to address so many fairness definitions. It could be possible
that as long as the system guarantees several important fairness notions then most other fairness
notions will be naturally guaranteed or guaranteed to some extent, and thus we do not have to
work on indefinitely many fairness notions. Second, when some fairness requirements cannot be
achieved simultaneously due to their conflicts, one important problem is how to achieve a good
and reasonable balance. Solving the problem may not only need technical innovations such as
Paretooptimalitybutalsocarefulsocialandethicalconsiderationssuchastransparencyandtrust.
Third, it would be important to explore personalized fairness, which allows each individual user
to express his or her own fairness demand [131], so the system would not have to resolve the
conflicting fairness definitions just based on the system designers’ understanding. Finally, if the
systemisdesignedforachievingonlyonefairnessrequirement,thenitisimportanttoknowhow
to choose the most suitable fairness consideration for the specific case. For example, which one is
moreimportantforimprovinguserfairnessinrecommendation?Groupfairnessorindividualfair-
ness?Staticfairnessordynamicfairness?Toanswerthequestions,itisimportanttostudyhowto
evaluate different fairness notions for a specific scenario. This further leads to another challenge:
Since existingworksareusuallyproposedunderdifferentperspectives,theyoftenadoptdifferent
or even unique evaluation metrics to evaluate fairness. Therefore, it is sometimes difficult to com-
pare the existing methods. To this end, some evaluation metrics or benchmark datasets that can
help us to compare different fairness notions from a unified view are highly appreciated in the
future.
8.2 Relationship between Fairness and Other Trustworthy AI Perspectives
Fairnessisaveryimportantperspectivefortrustworthy,responsible,andethicalAIresearch.How-
ever, except for fairness, there are many other perspectives to consider, such as explainability,
controllability, robustness, and privacy. A very important problem is to explore the relationship
between fairness and other trustworthy AI perspectives and how can the different perspectives
interact with each other to develop more trustworthy AI systems.
Takefairnessandexplainabilityasanexample.Asmentionedabove,duetotheinherentconflict
betweensomefairnessdefinitions,insomecases,thesystemmaynotbeabletomeeteveryuser’s
fairnessrequirementduetotheconflictingfairnessdemands,andinsuchcases,transparencyand
honesty from the system may be highly appreciated. For instance, the system may honestly ex-
plain to some users why they have to bear a bit of unfair treatment at the current moment to
betterserveother(usuallythemajorityof)peopleorforcertainlong-termgoals,andhowthesys-
tem will compensate such unfair treatment in the future. Besides, if we implement a fair system,
then we also need to explain to users why a decision is fair for the user to make sure users trust
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:34 Y. Li et al.
theintelligentsystem.Thisrequirestheresearchcommunitytobetterunderstandtherelationship
between explainability and fairness and develop explainable fairness [88] models in the future so
explainabilityandfairnesscanbenefiteachother.Otherresearchtopicsincludetherelationshipbe-
tweenfairnessandrobustness,suchasout-of-distributiongeneralization;therelationshipbetween
fairness and privacy, such as the fairness in federated learning; and the relationship between fair-
ness and controllability, such as if and how users can actively control the fairness demands for
themselves [131,223].
8.3 Causal Foundations for Fairness
As we introduced in Section7.3.4, it is important to consider causal-based fairness notions to
address unfairness in recommendation. There are some works considering causality in classifi-
cation [122, 126] and general recommendation [130, 231, 232] tasks, however, the exploration of
causal fairness in recommendation problem is still very limited. Although recommendation task
canbeformulatedasaclassificationprobleminsomecases,thecausalfairnesstechniquesinclas-
sification may not be directly migrated to the recommendation problem. For example, to achieve
counterfactualfairnessinclassification,asstatedinReference[ 122],themoststraightforwardway
to guarantee the independence between the predicted results and the sensitive features is just to
avoidusingthesensitivefeatures(andthefeaturescausallydependonthesensitivefeatures)asin-
put.However,thisisnotthecaseinrecommendationscenarios:Mostofthecollaborativelearning-
based recommendation algorithms such as collaborative filtering and collaborative reasoning are
directly trained from user-item interaction information [73], which do not use any feature, no
matter sensitive feature or non-sensitive feature. However, the model still generates unfair rec-
ommendations on user-sensitive features even if the model does not directly use any feature as
input [131]. The reason is that during collaborative learning, the model may capture the underly-
ing relationships between user features and user behaviors that are inherently encoded into the
training data, since user features may have causal impacts on user behaviors and preferences. As
a result, we need to design methods to achieve counterfactually fair recommendations, and this
cannot be realized in trivial ways such as not using sensitive feature, because the collaborative
learning model does not use sensitive feature from the beginning. Therefore, more explorations
aboutcausalityconsiderationsareneededtounderstandtheunderlyingreasonsofunfairnessand
solve the unfairness issue properly.
8.4 Understanding the Connection between Bias and Fairness
Bias and fairness are often mentioned concurrently or even obfuscated sometimes, but their re-
lationship has not been clearly understood or discussed in the community. In general, various
biases could be the main causes of the unfair results in recommendation. For example, the popu-
larity bias in data may cause exposure unfairness on item side, while the gender bias in data may
causeunfairtreatmentonuserside.Theconnectionbetweenaspecifictypeofbiasandunfairness
can be intricate. For example, unfairness in gender may be caused by biases in the training data,
biases in the model design, or the biases of using inappropriate optimization functions or evalua-
tion benchmarks. Moreover, a particular bias, such as bias in the training data, can also result in
multiple forms of unfairness, such as unfairness towards individuals, unfairness towards groups,
short-termunfairness,orlong-termunfairness.Whatismore,thepresenceofbiasdoesnotneces-
sarily always lead to unfairness. For example, even if there is bias in the training data, unfairness
can be avoided through model calibration. Besides the various biases in data or algorithm, there
are also other reasons for unfairness. For example, researches have shown that some fairness re-
quirementscannotbesatisfiedatthesametime[ 55,120,175],therefore,theviolationofonetype
of fairness may be caused by ensuring another.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:35
Recently,researchershaveexploredvariousbiasesanddebiasmethodsinrecommendation[ 49],
though being obfuscated in some cases, the works about bias and unfairness in recommendation
usuallyhavesomedifferences.First,existingdebiasresearchesusuallyfocusonhowtousedebias
methods to improve the recommendation accuracy or robustness, rather than promoting fairness.
Second, fairness works usually present clear fairness definitions and well-defined quantitative
metrics to evaluate model unfairness, for example, papers may use the differences on model
performance across groups to measure group-level unfairness. The works about fairness in rec-
ommendation usually evaluate the proposed methods on both the fairness metrics and the model
accuracy metrics. However, the works about debias usually evaluate the model performance on
metrics of model accuracy and use the improvement on the accuracy to show the effectiveness of
debiasing. What is more, though biases are the main causes of unfairness and the debias methods
may be helpful to enhance fairness, many works on fairness are not implemented through
debiasing methods but through directly adding fairness requirements over the model outcome,
such as adding a fairness constraint on the optimization process, which bears the risk of losing
accuracy. Therefore, there is a gap between the research on debias and fairness, though the two
problems have deep connections both theoretically and practically. As a result, the relationship
betweenbiasandunfairnessshouldbecarefullyconsideredandtheconnectionbetweendebiasing
and fairness promotion methods should be better established, which may lead to better under-
standings on the causes of unfairness as well as better methods for improving both fairness and
accuracy.
8.5 Considerations in Real-world Deployment
Although many fairness research have been conducted in academia and industry, deploying
fairness-aware models to benefit users in real-world system requires a lot more practical consid-
erations. The deployment of fairness-aware models in industry can be broadly classified into two
types: user-oriented deployment and developer-oriented deployment. User-oriented deployment
focusesondeliveringfairness-awareresultstorealusersofthesystemandthusdirectlyinfluences
the service of users, while developer-oriented deployment does not immediately deliver such
results to users but instead focuses on developing tools within the production environment to
help developers and policy makers better understand the system unfairness. It is worth noting
that the “users” in user-oriented deployment not only include the average users of the system
such as the consumers in e-commerce or the viewers in short video social networks, other
stakeholders in the system such as the various sellers in e-commerce and the video creators in
social networks are also users of the platform, who also have their fairness demands such as fair
exposure opportunity of their items.
An example of user-oriented deployment is LinkedIn [91], which explored the first large-scale
deployed framework for ensuring fairness in the hiring domain. Researchers applied the fairness
framework to LinkedIn Talent Search to achieve fairness criteria such as equality of opportunity
and demographic parity in candidate ranking. Researchers also presented the online A/B testing
results,whichshowedthattheirapproachresultedintremendousimprovementinfairnessmetrics
without affecting the business metrics. An example of developer-oriented deployment is Amazon
SageMakerClarify[ 100],whichdevelopedexplainabilitytoolkitsforAmazonSageMakerandwas
deployedintheAmazonAWScloudcomputingclusters.Basedonthetoolkits,variousdevelopers
all over the world who use the cloud cluster can easily detect and monitor if there is any bias in
theirdataormodelandiftheresultsproducedbytheirmodelarefair.Thiscanhelpthedevelopers
to better understand the consequences of their models and thus help them to better refine the
models. Due to the multi-stakeholder nature of fairness in real-world systems [2], in the future, it
is important to understand the difference and relationship between the various fairness demands
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:36 Y. Li et al.
from various stakeholders in real-world systems, and how the knowledge from developer-
oriented deployment can be transferred to user-oriented deployment to directly benefit the
users.
8.6 Understanding the Relationship between Fairness and Utility
As mentioned above, fairness-aware methods may be deployed in user-oriented or developer-
oriented ways in practice. Developer-oriented deployment usually meets fewer obstacles in real-
worldsystemsbecauseitdoesnotimmediatelyinfluencetheusersandbusinessmetrics.However,
more in-depth considerations or tradeoffs usually need to be considered for user-oriented deploy-
mentinpracticalsystems.Ononehand,real-wordrecommendersystemsareusuallyverycomplex
withmultiplemodulesandmassivetrainingdata,andthusitcanbedifficulttofigureoutallofthe
fairness problems in such a huge system. On the other hand, many industry companies usually
putbusinessmetricssuchaspurchaseratesfirstcomparedtothefairtreatmentofusers,andthus
the incentive to promote fairness is less than that of chasing profits in many practical systems,
especially if there is an inevitable tradeoff between fairness and profit metrics. Of course, one ap-
proach to promoting fairness in practice is through various legal requirements that are already
implemented in many countries, such as theGeneral Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in
EU,16 California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in the US,17 and theInternet Information
Service and Algorithmic Recommendation Regulation (IISARR) in China,18 which enforce
fair treatment of users in real-world systems. However, it is also very important for the research
community to further explore the relationship between fairness and utility to improve the incen-
tive of industry practitioners to promote fairness.
Thisrequiresfurtherexplorationsonthreefolds:(1)Explorethecaseswherefairnessandutility
donotconflictwitheachotherbutactuallypromoteeachother.Actually,therehavebeenresearch
on user-oriented group-fairness in recommendation [129, 180], which show that by carefully
definingthegroupsandfairnessmetrics,itispossibleforrecommendationmodelstoimproveboth
fairnessandutility(suchasrecommendationaccuracy)atthesametime.Inthefuture,itispromis-
ingtoexploreifco-improvingfairnessandutilityispossibleunderotherfairnessandutilitydefini-
tions;(2)Ifthereisreallyaninevitableconflictbetweencertainfairnessandutilitymetrics,thenwe
candevelopmethodstoguaranteefairnesswithasfewutilitylossesaspossibleorguaranteeutility
withasfewfairnesslossesaspossible,explainsuchlossestousersinappropriatewayssotheycan
accept it, and amortize the losses across users or time so the system does not always hurt some
(typesof)users.Thismayrequirefurtherinnovationsonmulti-objectiveoptimization,Paretoopti-
mization,explainablefairness,dynamicfairness,andcreativeuserinterfacesinthefuture;(3)Same
as any other trustworthy AI research, understanding the benefits of fairness in recommendation
should be considered in the dynamic and long-term context. Some research shows that certain
fairness and utility metrics may have to trade off with each other in short-term settings [89, 210],
however,duetothelimitationsondatasetsandevaluationmethods,existingresearchonfairness-
utility relationship are mostly conducted under static environments using fixed datasets rather
than in dynamic deployed systems. As a result, it is not surprising to observe that increasing fair-
nessmayhurtrecommendationaccuracy,becauserecommendingmorelong-tailitemstoincrease
exposure fairness will naturally lead to fewer recommendation hits in static datasets where popu-
laritybiasofuserclicksarealreadyrecordedinthetestingset.Thisdoesnotnecessarilymeanthat
increasing fairness definitely hurts utility in deployed systems, because in the long-term, if users
16https://gdpr.eu/
17https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa
18http://www.cac.gov.cn/2022-01/04/c_1642894606364259.htm
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:37
feeltheyarefairlytreatedbythesystem,thenitwillhelptoincreaseusers’retention,interest,trust,
andengagementinthesystem,andwillthushelptocreateasustainableeco-systemintheplatform,
whicheventuallyleadstoincreasedutilityandprofitsfortheplatforminthelongrun.Asaresult,
itisimportanttoexploretherelationshipbetweenutilityandfairnessinthelongruninreal-world
deployed systems, and this requires close collaboration between academia and industry in the
future.
8.7 Developing Better Metrics, Benchmarks, and Simulation Environments
Thoughwehaveintroducedseveralbenchmarkdatasetstostudyfairnessinthissurvey,theavail-
abledatasettosupportfairnessresearchisstillverylimited.Thisisbecausetheresearchonfairness
usually requires datasets that have sufficient features such as user personal information. Besides,
there exist many different fairness concerns and each requires certain dataset to study, which
means that a diverse portfolio of datasets are needed for fairness research. As a result, extensive
efforts are needed in the future to create various datasets to support fairness study. More impor-
tantly, this may require innovative solutions to meet the demands of both researchers and data
providers.Forexample,manyfairnessresearchrelyonusers’personalinformation,however,most
of the personal information are users’ sensitive features such as gender, race, age, location, and
income. which are closely related to users’ privacy. As a result, researchers should take extreme
carewhencreatingandpublishingdatasetsforfairnessresearch,suchasproperanonymizationof
usersandevendevelopingadvancedmethodsforbothprivacyprotectionandfairnesspromotion,
such as through federated learning or differential privacy.
However, many users in real-world systems may choose to not reveal their personal informa-
tion in registration or even provide wrong personal information. The reason for users to do so is
exactly because they are afraid of being unfairly treated by the system or breach of their privacy.
However, without such information, it would be difficult to improve fairness for them even if the
system wants to do so, which results in a dilemma due to the crisis of confidence. As a result, it is
important to create a good incentive and build trust with users so they are willing to provide the
relevant information to support fairness promotion. Besides, the community can explore reliable
data augmentation and data curation methods to improve the quality of incomplete datasets and
develop fairness-aware methods that do not rely on users’ sensitive features when they are not
available.
Fairness evaluation is also an important problem that needs further exploration. As mentioned
in previous sections, the fairness definitions are very diverse. Currently, each type of fairness has
its unique evaluation methods, which makes it difficult to compare different fairness methods
or develop unified models that can improve fairness from multiple perspectives. As a result,
it would be promising if a systematic evaluation protocol can be developed that enables us to
evaluate diffident fairness requirements on the same scale. Furthermore, we may even develop
methods to evaluate various utility and trustworthy considerations in the same framework, such
as fairness, accuracy, explainability, robustness, and privacy. Finally, to support the evaluation
of dynamic fairness and to explore the long-term effect of fairness, a simulation environment
will be highly appreciated by the community. We are pleased to see that few recent works,
such as References [29, 180], began to explore comparing different fairness methods in recom-
mendation. However, these works only cover one perspective of fairness in recommendation,
i.e., the user fairness, since it is hard to measure so many different aspects of fairness within a
same framework. Researchers have attempted to build simulation platforms for recommendation
accuracy research such as RecSim [106], and similar platforms for fairness research will be very
useful not only to the recommender system community but also to the broader fairness in AI
communities.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:38 Y. Li et al.
9 CONCLUSIONS
Inthissurvey,weaimtointroducethefoundations,definitions,methods,andoutlooksforfairness
inrecommendationresearch.Webeginthesurveywithabriefintroductionoffairnessinmachine
learning to provide beginners with a general view and basic background knowledge of fairness
research, including the causes, methods, as well as different considerations of fairness. To help
better understand the fairness concepts in recommendation, we also introduce the basic fairness
definitions and methods in classification and ranking tasks, since they are closely related to fair-
nessinrecommendersystems.Forthemainbodyofthesurvey,weprovideataxonomytoclassify
the existing fairness definitions in recommender systems to help reader build a systematic under-
standing of the area. We also introduce the various technical and evaluation methods as well as
datasets for fairness in recommendation research. Finally, we discuss the challenges and opportu-
nities of fairness research in recommendation with the hope of both inspiring future innovations
and promoting fairness deployment in real-world systems.
REFERENCES
[1] 2022. Retrieved fromhttps://data36.com/statistical-bias-types-explained/
[2] HimanAbdollahpouriandRobinBurke.2019.Multi-stakeholderrecommendationanditsconnectiontomulti-sided
fairness. InProceedings of the RMSE Workshop Held in Conjunction with the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender
Systems.
[3] Himan Abdollahpouri, Robin Burke, and Bamshad Mobasher. 2017. Controlling popularity bias in learning-to-rank
recommendation. InRecSys. 42–46.
[4] Himan Abdollahpouri, Robin Burke, and Bamshad Mobasher. 2019. Managing popularity bias in recommender sys-
tems with personalized re-ranking.arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.07555(2019).
[5] HimanAbdollahpouri,MasoudMansoury,RobinBurke,andBamshadMobasher.2019.Theunfairnessofpopularity
bias in recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.13286(2019).
[6] HimanAbdollahpouri,MasoudMansoury,RobinBurke,andBamshadMobasher.2020.Theconnectionbetweenpop-
ularitybias,calibration,andfairnessinrecommendation.In Proceedingsofthe14thACMConferenceonRecommender
Systems. 726–731.
[7] Fabian Abel, Yashar Deldjoo, Mehdi Elahi, and Daniel Kohlsdorf. 2017. RecSys challenge 2017: Offline and online
evaluation. InProceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 372–373.
[8] Gediminas Adomavicius and YoungOk Kwon. 2011. Improving aggregate recommendation diversity using ranking-
based techniques.IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering24, 5 (2011), 896–911.
[9] Gediminas Adomavicius and Alexander Tuzhilin. 2011. Context-aware recommender systems. InRecommender Sys-
tems Handbook. Springer, 217–253.
[10] M. Mehdi Afsar, Trafford Crump, and Behrouz Far. 2021. Reinforcement learning based recommender systems: A
survey.arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06286(2021).
[11] Nil-Jana Akpinar, Cyrus DiCiccio, Preetam Nandy, and Kinjal Basu. 2022. Long-term dynamics of fairness interven-
tioninconnectionrecommendersystems.In ProceedingsoftheConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,Ethics,andSociety
(AIES’22).
[12] Muhammad Ammad-Ud-Din, Elena Ivannikova, Suleiman A. Khan, Were Oyomno, Qiang Fu, Kuan Eeik Tan, and
Adrian Flanagan. 2019. Federated collaborative filtering for privacy-preserving personalized recommendation sys-
tem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09888(2019).
[13] Vito Walter Anelli, Yashar Deldjoo, Tommaso Di Noia, Antonio Ferrara, and Fedelucio Narducci. 2021. How to put
users in control of their data in federated top-N recommendation with learning to rank. InProceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing. 1359–1362.
[14] Mario Arduini, Lorenzo Noci, Federico Pirovano, Ce Zhang, Yash Raj Shrestha, and Bibek Paudel. 2020. Adversarial
learning for debiasing knowledge graph embeddings.arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16309(2020).
[15] Abolfazl Asudeh, H. V. Jagadish, Julia Stoyanovich, and Gautam Das. 2019. Designing fair ranking schemes. InPro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Management of Data. 1259–1276.
[16] Ricardo Baeza-Yates. 2018. Bias on the web.Commun. ACM61, 6 (2018), 54–61.
[17] Solon Barocas and Andrew D. Selbst. 2016. Big data’s disparate impact.Calif. L. Rev.104 (2016), 671.
[18] Ghazaleh Beigi, Ahmadreza Mosallanezhad, Ruocheng Guo, Hamidreza Alvari, Alexander Nou, and Huan Liu. 2020.
Privacy-aware recommendation with private-attribute protection using adversarial learning. InProceedings of the
13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 34–42.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:39
[19] Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth. 2021. Fairness in criminal justice risk
assessments: The state of the art.Sociol. Meth. Res.50, 1 (2021), 3–44.
[20] Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Tulsee Doshi, Hai Qian, Li Wei, Yi Wu, Lukasz Heldt, Zhe Zhao, Lichan Hong, Ed H. Chi,
and Cristos Goodrow. 2019. Fairness in recommendation ranking through pairwise comparisons. InProceedings of
the SIGKDD Conference. 2212–2220.
[21] AlexBeutel,JilinChen,TulseeDoshi,HaiQian,AllisonWoodruff,ChristineLuu,PierreKreitmann,JonathanBischof,
andEdH.Chi.2019.Puttingfairnessprinciplesintopractice:Challenges,metrics,andimprovements.In Proceedings
of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. 453–459.
[22] AlexBeutel,JilinChen,ZheZhao,andEdH.Chi.2017.Datadecisionsandtheoreticalimplicationswhenadversarially
learning fair representations.arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00075(2017).
[23] Asia J. Biega, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Gerhard Weikum. 2018. Equity of attention: Amortizing individual fairness
in rankings. InProceedings of the 41st International ACM Sigir Conference on Research & Development in Information
Retrieval. 405–414.
[24] Alper Bilge, Cihan Kaleli, Ibrahim Yakut, Ihsan Gunes, and Huseyin Polat. 2013. A survey of privacy-preserving
collaborative filtering schemes.Int. J. Softw. Eng. Knowl. Eng.23, 08 (2013), 1085–1108.
[25] Arpita Biswas,Gourab K.Patro, Niloy Ganguly,Krishna P.Gummadi,and Abhijnan Chakraborty. 2021.Towardfair
recommendation in two-sided platforms.ACM Trans. Web16, 2 (2021), 1–34.
[26] JesúsBobadilla,RaúlLara-Cabrera,ÁngelGonzález-Prieto, andFernandoOrtega.2020.DeepFair:Deeplearningfor
improving fairness in recommender systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05255(2020).
[27] Stephen Bonner and Flavian Vasile. 2018. Causal embeddings for recommendation. InProceedings of the 12th ACM
Conference on Recommender Systems. 104–112.
[28] Ludovico Boratto, Gianni Fenu, and Mirko Marras. 2021. Interplay between upsampling and regularization for
provider fairness in recommender systems.User Model. User-adapt. Interact.31, 3 (2021), 421–455.
[29] Ludovico Boratto, Gianni Fenu, Mirko Marras, and Giacomo Medda. 2022. Consumer fairness in recommender sys-
tems: Contextualizing definitions and mitigations. InProceedings of the 44th European Conference on Information
Retrieval.
[30] Rodrigo Borges and Kostas Stefanidis. 2019. Enhancing long term fairness in recommendations with variational
autoencoders. InProceedings of the 11th International Conference on Management of Digital Ecosystems. 95–102.
[31] AvishekBoseandWilliamHamilton.2019.Compositionalfairnessconstraintsforgraphembeddings.In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 715–724.
[32] AmandaBower,HamidEftekhari,MikhailYurochkin,andYuekaiSun.2021.Individuallyfairranking. arXivpreprint
arXiv:2103.11023 (2021).
[33] EricBudish.2011.Thecombinatorialassignmentproblem:Approximatecompetitiveequilibriumfromequalincomes.
J. Polit. Econ.119, 6 (2011), 1061–1103.
[34] Robin Burke. 2002. Hybrid recommender systems: Survey and experiments.User Model. User-adapt. Interact.12,
4 (2002), 331–370.
[35] Robin Burke. 2017. Multisided fairness for recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00093(2017).
[36] Robin Burke, Nasim Sonboli, Masoud Mansoury, and Aldo Ordoñez-Gauger. 2017. Balanced Neighborhoods for
Fairness-aware Collaborative Recommendation. InProceedings of ACM FATRec Workshop, Como, Italy, August 2017
(FATRec’17),5p a g e s .https://doi.org/10.18122/B2GQ53
[37] Robin Burke, Nasim Sonboli, and Aldo Ordonez-Gauger. 2018. Balanced neighborhoods for multi-sided fairness in
recommendation. InProceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency. PMLR, 202–214.
[38] ToonCalders,FaisalKamiran,andMykolaPechenizkiy.2009.Buildingclassifierswithindependencyconstraints.In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops. IEEE, 13–18.
[39] FlavioCalmon,DennisWei,BhanukiranVinzamuri,KarthikeyanNatesanRamamurthy,andKushR.Varshney.2017.
Optimized pre-processing for discrimination prevention.Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.30 (2017).
[40] Alessandro Castelnovo, Riccardo Crupi, Greta Greco, Daniele Regoli, Ilaria Giuseppina Penco, and Andrea Claudio
Cosentini. 2022. A clarification of the nuances in the fairness metrics landscape.Scient. Rep.12, 1 (2022), 1–21.
[41] SimonCatonandChristianHaas.2020.Fairnessinmachinelearning:Asurvey. arXivpreprintarXiv:2010.04053 (2020).
[42] L. Elisa Celis, Damian Straszak, and Nisheeth K. Vishnoi. 2017. Ranking with fairness constraints.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.06840 (2017).
[43] Òscar Celma Herrada. 2009.Music Recommendation and Discovery in the Long Tail. Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
[44] Abhijnan Chakraborty, Gourab K. Patro, Niloy Ganguly, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Patrick Loiseau. 2019. Equality
of voice: Towards fair representation in crowdsourced top-k recommendations. InProceedings of the Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 129–138.
[45] Harshal A. Chaudhari, Sangdi Lin, and Ondrej Linda. 2020. A general framework for fairness in multistakeholder
recommendations.arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.02423(2020).
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:40 Y. Li et al.
[46] Hanxiong Chen, Yunqi Li, Shaoyun Shi, Shuchang Liu, He Zhu, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2022. Graph collaborative
reasoning. InProceedings of the 15th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 75–84.
[47] Haoyu Chen, Wenbin Lu, Rui Song, and Pulak Ghosh. 2020. Counterfactual fairness through data preprocessing.
(2020).
[48] Hanxiong Chen, Shaoyun Shi, Yunqi Li, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. Neural collaborative reasoning. InProceedings
of the WWW Conference.
[49] Jiawei Chen, Hande Dong, Xiang Wang, Fuli Feng, Meng Wang, and Xiangnan He. 2020. Bias and debias in recom-
mender system: A survey and future directions.arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03240(2020).
[50] LeiChen,LeWu,KunZhang,RichangHong,DefuLian,ZhiqiangZhang,JunZhou,andMengWang.2023.Improving
recommendation fairness via data augmentation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06333(2023).
[51] Xiao Chen, Wenqi Fan, Jingfan Chen, Haochen Liu, Zitao Liu, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and Qing Li. 2023. Fairly adaptive
negative sampling for recommendations.arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08266(2023).
[52] Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2022. Measuring “why” in recommender systems: A comprehensive
survey on the evaluation of explainable recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06466(2022).
[53] SilviaChiappa.2019.Path-specificcounterfactualfairness.In ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelli-
gence, Vol. 33. 7801–7808.
[54] Silvia Chiappa and William S. Isaac. 2018. A causal Bayesian networks viewpoint on fairness. InProceedings of the
IFIP International Summer School on Privacy and Identity Management. Springer, 3–20.
[55] Alexandra Chouldechova. 2017. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism prediction in-
struments. Big Data5, 2 (2017), 153–163.
[56] Alexandra Chouldechova and Aaron Roth. 2018. The frontiers of fairness in machine learning.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.08810 (2018).
[57] Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. 2017. Algorithmic decision making and
thecostoffairness.In Proceedingsofthe23rdACMSigkddInternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandData
Mining. 797–806.
[58] Felipe Costa, Sixun Ouyang, Peter Dolog, and Aonghus Lawlor. 2018. Automatic generation of natural language
explanations. InProceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces Companion.1 – 2 .
[59] Nick Craswell, Onno Zoeter, Michael Taylor, and Bill Ramsey. 2008. An experimental comparison of click position-
bias models. InProceedings of the International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 87–94.
[60] Elliot Creager, David Madras, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. 2020. Causal modeling for fairness in dynamical
systems. InProceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2185–2195.
[61] Brian d’Alessandro, Cathy O’Neil, and Tom LaGatta. 2017. Conscientious classification: A data scientist’s guide to
discrimination-aware classification.Big Data5, 2 (2017), 120–134.
[62] AlexanderD’Amour,HansaSrinivasan,JamesAtwood,PallaviBaljekar,D.Sculley,andYoniHalpern.2020.Fairness
is not static: Deeper understanding of long term fairness via simulation studies. InProceedings of the Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 525–534.
[63] Yashar Deldjoo, Dietmar Jannach, Alejandro Bellogin, Alessandro Difonzo, and Dario Zanzonelli. 2022. A survey of
research on fair recommender systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11127(2022).
[64] PietroG.DiStefano,JamesM.Hickey,andVlasiosVasileiou.2020.Counterfactualfairness:Removingdirecteffects
through regularization.arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10774(2020).
[65] Fernando Diaz, Bhaskar Mitra, Michael D. Ekstrand, Asia J. Biega, and Ben Carterette. 2020. Evaluating stochastic
rankings with expected exposure. InProceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowl-
edge Management. 275–284.
[66] Virginie Do, Sam Corbett-Davies, Jamal Atif, and Nicolas Usunier. 2021. Online certification of preference-based
fairness for personalized recommender systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14527(2021).
[67] Qiang Dong, Shuang-Shuang Xie, and Wen-Jun Li. 2021. User-item matching for recommendation fairness.IEEE
Access 9 (2021), 130389–130398.
[68] Mengnan Du, Fan Yang, Na Zou, and Xia Hu. 2020. Fairness in deep learning: A computational perspective.IEEE
Intelligent Systems36, 4 (2020), 25–34.
[69] CynthiaDwork,MoritzHardt,ToniannPitassi,OmerReingold,andRichardZemel.2012.Fairnessthroughawareness.
In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference. 214–226.
[70] Cynthia Dwork, Nicole Immorlica, Adam Tauman Kalai, and Max Leiserson. 2018. Decoupled classifiers for group-
fair and efficient machine learning. InProceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency.
PMLR, 119–133.
[71] Harrison Edwards and Amos Storkey. 2015. Censoring representations with an adversary. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.05897 (2015).
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:41
[72] Michael D. Ekstrand, Anubrata Das, Robin Burke, and Fernando Diaz. 2022. Fairness in information access systems.
Found. Trends® Inf. Retr.16, 1-2 (2022), 1–177.
[73] Michael D. Ekstrand, John T. Riedl, and Joseph A. Konstan. 2011.Collaborative Filtering Recommender Systems.N o w
Publishers Inc.
[74] Yanai Elazar and Yoav Goldberg. 2018. Adversarial removal of demographic attributes from text data.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.06640 (2018).
[75] CharlesEvansandAtoosaKasirzadeh.2021.Usertamperinginreinforcementlearningrecommendersystems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2109.04083(2021).
[76] Francesco Fabbri, Maria Luisa Croci, Francesco Bonchi, and Carlos Castillo. 2022. Exposure inequality in people
recommender systems: the long-term effects. InProceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media, Vol. 16, 194–204.
[77] WenqiFan,XiangyuZhao,XiaoChen,JingranSu,JingtongGao,LinWang,QidongLiu,YiqiWang,HanXu,LeiChen,
and Qing Li. 2022. A comprehensive survey on trustworthy recommender systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10117
(2022).
[78] Golnoosh Farnadi, Pigi Kouki, Spencer K. Thompson, Sriram Srinivasan, and Lise Getoor. 2018. A fairness-aware
hybrid recommender system.arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09030(2018).
[79] SinaFazelpourandZacharyC.Lipton.2020.Algorithmicfairnessfromanon-idealperspective.In Proceedingsofthe
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. 57–63.
[80] MichaelFeldman,SorelleA.Friedler,JohnMoeller,CarlosScheidegger,andSureshVenkatasubramanian.2015.Certi-
fyingandremovingdisparateimpact.In Proceedingsofthe21stACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. 259–268.
[81] Rui Feng, Yang Yang, Yuehan Lyu, Chenhao Tan, Yizhou Sun, and Chunping Wang. 2019. Learning fair representa-
tions via an adversarial framework.arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.13341(2019).
[82] Roberto Fierimonte, Simone Scardapane, Aurelio Uncini, and Massimo Panella. 2016. Fully decentralized semi-
supervised learning via privacy-preserving matrix completion.IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.28, 11 (2016),
2699–2711.
[83] ZuohuiFu,YikunXian,RuoyuanGao,JieyuZhao,QiaoyingHuang,YingqiangGe,ShuyuanXu,ShijieGeng,Chirag
Shah, Yongfeng Zhang, and Gerard de Melo. 2020. Fairness-aware explainable recommendation over knowledge
graphs. InProceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval. 69–78.
[84] SainyamGalhotra,YuriyBrun,andAlexandraMeliou.2017.Fairnesstesting:Testingsoftwarefordiscrimination.In
Proceedings of the 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering. 498–510.
[85] Ruoyuan Gao and Chirag Shah. 2019. How fair can we go: Detecting the boundaries of fairness optimization in
information retrieval. InProceedings of the ACM SIGIR International Conference on Theory of Information Retrieval.
229–236.
[86] Yingqiang Ge, Shuchang Liu, Zuohui Fu, Juntao Tan, Zelong Li, Shuyuan Xu, Yunqi Li, Yikun Xian, and Yongfeng
Zhang. 2022. A survey on trustworthy recommender systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12515(2022).
[87] Yingqiang Ge, Shuchang Liu, Ruoyuan Gao, Yikun Xian, Yunqi Li, Xiangyu Zhao, Changhua Pei, Fei Sun, Junfeng
Ge, Wenwu Ou, and others. 2021. Towards long-term fairness in recommendation. InProceedings of the 14th ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 445–453.
[88] Yingqiang Ge, Juntao Tan, Yan Zhu, Yinglong Xia, Jiebo Luo, Shuchang Liu, Zuohui Fu, Shijie Geng, Zelong Li, and
Yongfeng Zhang. 2022. Explainable fairness in recommendation. InProceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 681–691.
[89] Yingqiang Ge, Xiaoting Zhao, Lucia Yu, Saurabh Paul, Diane Hu, Chu-Cheng Hsieh, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2022.
TowardParetoefficientfairness-utilitytrade-offinrecommendationthroughreinforcementlearning.In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 316–324.
[90] Shijie Geng, Shuchang Liu, Zuohui Fu, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2022. Recommendation as Language
Processing (RLP): A unified pretrain, personalized prompt & predict paradigm (P5).arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13366
(2022).
[91] Sahin Cem Geyik, Stuart Ambler, and Krishnaram Kenthapadi. 2019. Fairness-aware ranking in search & recom-
mendationsystemswithapplicationtoLinkedIntalentsearch.In Proceedingsofthe25thACMSIGKDDInternational
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 2221–2231.
[92] BruceGlymourandJonathanHerington.2019.Measuringthebiasesthatmatter:Theethicalandcasualfoundations
formeasuresoffairnessinalgorithms.In ProceedingsoftheConferenceonFairness,Accountability,andTransparency .
269–278.
[93] GabrielGoh,AndrewCotter,MayaGupta,andMichaelP.Friedlander.2016.Satisfyingreal-worldgoalswithdataset
constraints.Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.29 (2016).
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:42 Y. Li et al.
[94] David Goldberg, David Nichols, Brian M. Oki, and Douglas Terry. 1992. Using collaborative filtering to weave an
information tapestry.Communications of the ACM35, 12 (1992), 61–70.
[95] Barry Goldman and Russell Cropanzano. 2015. “Justice” and “fairness” are not the same thing.J. Organiz. Behav.36,
2 (2015), 313–318.
[96] Elizabeth Gómez, Carlos Shui Zhang, Ludovico Boratto, Maria Salamó, and Mirko Marras. 2021. The winner takes
it all: Geographic imbalance and provider (Un) fairness in educational recommender systems. InProceedings of the
44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 1808–1812.
[97] YashGoyal,ZiyanWu,JanErnst,DhruvBatra,DeviParikh,andStefanLee.2019.Counterfactualvisualexplanations.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2376–2384.
[98] VincentGrari,SylvainLamprier,andMarcinDetyniecki.2020.Adversariallearningforcounterfactualfairness. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.13122(2020).
[99] JialiangHan,YunMa,QiaozhuMei,andXuanzheLiu.2021.DeepRec:On-devicedeeplearningforprivacy-preserving
sequential recommendation in mobile commerce. InProceedings of the Web Conference. 900–911.
[100] Michaela Hardt, Xiaoguang Chen, Xiaoyi Cheng, Michele Donini, Jason Gelman, Satish Gollaprolu, John He, Pedro
Larroy,XinyuLiu,NickMcCarthy,AshishRathi,ScottRees,AnkitSiva,ErhYuanTsai,KeerthanVasist,PinarYilmaz,
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Sanjiv Das, Kevin Haas, Tyler Hill, and Krishnaram Kenthapadi. 2021. Amazon SageMaker
Clarify: Machine learning bias detection and explainability in the cloud. InProceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 2974–2983.
[101] Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. 2016. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning.Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst.29 (2016).
[102] XiangnanHe,LiziLiao,HanwangZhang,LiqiangNie,XiaHu,andTat-SengChua.2017.Neuralcollaborativefiltering.
In Proceedings of the WWW Conference. 173–182.
[103] Lisa Anne Hendricks, Ronghang Hu, Trevor Darrell, and Zeynep Akata. 2018. Grounding visual explanations. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV’18). 264–279.
[104] Andreas Henelius, Kai Puolamäki, Henrik Boström, Lars Asker, and Panagiotis Papapetrou. 2014. A peek into the
black box: Exploring classifiers by randomization.Data Min. Knowl. Discov.28, 5 (2014), 1503–1529.
[105] Wen Huang, Lu Zhang, and Xintao Wu. 2021. Achieving counterfactual fairness for causal bandit.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.10458 (2021).
[106] Eugene Ie, Chih-wei Hsu, Martin Mladenov, Vihan Jain, Sanmit Narvekar, Jing Wang, Rui Wu, and Craig Boutilier.
2019. RecSim: A configurable simulation platform for recommender systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.04847(2019).
[107] GuidoW.ImbensandDonaldB.Rubin.2015. CausalInferenceinStatistics,Social,andBiomedicalSciences .Cambridge
University Press.
[108] RashidulIslam,KamrunNaherKeya,ZiqianZeng,ShimeiPan,andJamesFoulds.2021.Debiasingcareerrecommen-
dations with neural fair collaborative filtering. InProceedings of the Web Conference. 3779–3790.
[109] Shahin Jabbari, Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, and Aaron Roth. 2017. Fairness in reinforce-
ment learning. InProceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 1617–1626.
[110] Arjan J. P. Jeckmans, Michael Beye, Zekeriya Erkin, Pieter Hartel, Reginald L. Lagendijk, and Qiang Tang. 2013.
Privacy in recommender systems. InSocial Media Retrieval. Springer, 263–281.
[111] ChristopherJung,SampathKannan,ChanghwaLee,MalleshPai,AaronRoth,andRakeshVohra.2020.Fairprediction
with endogenous behavior. InProceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. 677–678.
[112] FaisalKamiranandToonCalders.2010.Classificationwithnodiscriminationbypreferentialsampling.In Proceedings
of the 19th Machine Learning Conference. Citeseer, 1–6.
[113] ToshihiroKamishima.2003.Nantonaccollaborativefiltering:Recommendationbasedonorderresponses.In Proceed-
ings of the 9th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 583–588.
[114] Toshihiro Kamishima, Shotaro Akaho, Hideki Asoh, and Jun Sakuma. 2012. Fairness-aware classifier with prejudice
remover regularizer. InProceedings of the Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery
in Databases. Springer, 35–50.
[115] ToshihiroKamishima,ShotaroAkaho,HidekiAsoh,andJunSakuma.2014.Correctingpopularitybiasbyenhancing
recommendation neutrality. InProceedings of the RecSys Conference.
[116] Toshihiro Kamishima, Shotaro Akaho, Hideki Asoh, and Jun Sakuma. 2018. Recommendation independence. InPro-
ceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency. PMLR, 187–201.
[117] MesutKaya,DerekBridge,andNavaTintarev.2020.Ensuringfairnessingrouprecommendationsbyrank-sensitive
balancing of relevance. InProceedings of the 14th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 101–110.
[118] A. Khademi, S. Lee, D. Foley, and V. Honavar. 2019. Fairness in algorithmic decision making: An excursion through
the lens of causality. InProceedings of the WWW Conference.
[119] Niki Kilbertus, Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, Bernhard Schölkopf, Krikamol Muandet, and Isabel Valera. 2020. Fair
decisions despite imperfect predictions. InProceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics. PMLR, 277–287.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:43
[120] Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. 2017. Inherent trade-offs in the fair determination of
riskscores.In Proceedingsofthe8thInnovationsinTheoreticalComputerScienceConference(ITCS’17) ,Vol.67.Schloss
Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 43.
[121] Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. 2009. Matrix factorization techniques for recommender systems.
Computer 8 (2009), 30–37.
[122] MattJ.Kusner,JoshuaLoftus,ChrisRussell,andRicardoSilva.2017.Counterfactualfairness. Adv.NeuralInf.Process.
Syst.30 (2017).
[123] Preethi Lahoti, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Gerhard Weikum. 2019. iFair: Learning individually fair data representa-
tions for algorithmic decision making. InProceedings of the IEEE 35th International Conference on Data Engineering
(ICDE’19). IEEE, 1334–1345.
[124] JurekLeonhardt,AvishekAnand,andMeghaKhosla.2018.Userfairnessinrecommendersystems.In Proceedingsof
the the Web Conference.101–102.
[125] Jie Li, Yongli Ren, and Ke Deng. 2022. FairGAN: GANs-based fairness-aware learning for recommendations with
implicit feedback. InProceedings of the ACM Web Conference. 297–307.
[126] Jiuyong Li, Weijia Zhang, Lin Liu, Kui Yu, Thuc Duy Le, and Jixue Liu. 2021. A general framework for causal classi-
fication.Int. J. Data Sci. Analyt.11, 2 (2021), 127–139.
[127] Lei Li, Yongfeng Zhang, and Li Chen. 2020. Generate neural template explanations for recommendation. InProceed-
ings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 755–764.
[128] LeiLi,YongfengZhang,andLiChen.2021.Personalizedtransformerforexplainablerecommendation.In Proceedings
ofthe59thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguisticsandthe11thInternationalJointConference
on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). 4947–4957.
[129] Yunqi Li, Hanxiong Chen, Zuohui Fu, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. User-oriented fairness in recom-
mendation. InProceedings of the WWW Conference.
[130] Yunqi Li, Hanxiong Chen, Juntao Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2022. Causal factorization machine for robust recom-
mendation. InProceedings of the ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL’22).
[131] Yunqi Li, Hanxiong Chen, Shuyuan Xu, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. Towards personalized fairness
based on causal notion. InProceedings of the SIGIR Conference.
[132] Yunqi Li, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. CIKM 2021 tutorial on fairness of machine learning in recom-
mender systems. InProceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management.
4857–4860.
[133] YunqiLi,YingqiangGe,andYongfengZhang.2021.Tutorialonfairnessofmachinelearninginrecommendersystems.
InProceedings of the SIGIR Conference.
[134] Yunqi Li, Dingxian Wang, Hanxiong Chen, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2023. Transferable fairness for cold-start recom-
mendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10665(2023).
[135] Yunqi Li, Michiharu Yamashita, Hanxiong Chen, Dongwon Lee, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2023. Fairness in job recom-
mendation under quantity constraints. (2023).
[136] Guanyu Lin, Feng Liang, Weike Pan, and Zhong Ming. 2020. FedRec: Federated recommendation with explicit feed-
back. IEEE Intell. Syst.36, 5 (2020), 21–30.
[137] Xiao Lin, Min Zhang, Yongfeng Zhang, Zhaoquan Gu, Yiqun Liu, and Shaoping Ma. 2017. Fairness-aware group
recommendation with Pareto-efficiency. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems.
107–115.
[138] Qiao Liu, Yifu Zeng, Refuoe Mokhosi, and Haibin Zhang. 2018. STAMP: Short-Term Attention/Memory Priority
model for session-based recommendation. InProceedings of the SIGKDD Conference. ACM, 1831–1839.
[139] Shuchang Liu, Yingqiang Ge, Shuyuan Xu, Yongfeng Zhang, and Amelie Marian. 2022. Fairness-aware federated
matrix factorization. InProceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 168–178.
[140] Weiwen Liu and Robin Burke. 2018. Personalizing fairness-aware re-ranking.arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02921(2018).
[141] Weiwen Liu, Feng Liu, Ruiming Tang, Ben Liao, Guangyong Chen, and Pheng Ann Heng. 2021. Balancing accuracy
and fairness for interactive recommendation with reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13386(2021).
[142] Zelei Liu, Yuanyuan Chen, Yansong Zhao, Han Yu, Yang Liu, Renyi Bao, Jinpeng Jiang, Zaiqing Nie, Qian Xu, and
Qiang Yang. 2022. Contribution-aware federated learning for smart healthcare. InProceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI’22).
[143] Zhongzhou Liu, Yuan Fang, and Min Wu. 2023. Mitigating popularity bias for users and items with fairness-centric
adaptive recommendation.A C MT r a n s .I n f .S y s t .41, 3 (2023), 1–27.
[144] PasqualeLops,MarcoDeGemmis,andGiovanniSemeraro.2011.Content-basedrecommendersystems:Stateofthe
art and trends. InRecommender Systems Handbook. Springer, 73–105.
[145] AnaLucic,MaartjeA.TerHoeve,GabrieleTolomei,MaartenDeRijke,andFabrizioSilvestri.2022.CF-GNNExplainer:
Counterfactual explanations for graph neural networks. InProceedings of the International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 4499–4511.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:44 Y. Li et al.
[146] Binh Thanh Luong, Salvatore Ruggieri, and Franco Turini. 2011. k-NN as an implementation of situation testing
for discrimination discovery and prevention. InProceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 502–510.
[147] Jing Ma, Ruocheng Guo, Mengting Wan, Longqi Yang, Aidong Zhang, and Jundong Li. 2022. Learning fair node
representations with graph counterfactual fairness.arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03662(2022).
[148] Karima Makhlouf, Sami Zhioua, and Catuscia Palamidessi. 2020. Survey on causal-based machine learning fairness
notions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09553(2020).
[149] Masoud Mansoury, Himan Abdollahpouri, Mykola Pechenizkiy, Bamshad Mobasher, and Robin Burke. 2020. Feed-
back loop and bias amplification in recommender systems. InProceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference
on Information & Knowledge Management. 2145–2148.
[150] Mirko Marras, Ludovico Boratto, Guilherme Ramos, and Gianni Fenu. 2022. Equality of learning opportunity via
individual fairness in personalized recommendations.International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education32,
3 (2022), 636–684.
[151] BrendanMcMahan,EiderMoore,DanielRamage,SethHampson,andBlaiseAguerayArcas.2017.Communication-
efficientlearningofdeepnetworksfromdecentralizeddata.In ArtificialIntelligenceandStatistics .PMLR,1273–1282.
[152] NinarehMehrabi,UmangGupta,FredMorstatter,GregVerSteeg,andAramGalstyan.2021.Attributingfairdecisions
with attention interventions.arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03952(2021).
[153] Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. 2021. A survey on bias
and fairness in machine learning.ACM Comput. Surv.54, 6 (2021), 1–35.
[154] Rishabh Mehrotra, James McInerney, Hugues Bouchard, Mounia Lalmas, and Fernando Diaz. 2018. Towards a fair
marketplace: Counterfactual evaluation of the trade-off between relevance, fairness & satisfaction in recommenda-
tion systems. InProceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management.
2243–2251.
[155] AlessandroB.Melchiorre,NavidRekabsaz,EmiliaParada-Cabaleiro,StefanBrandl,OlegLesota,andMarkusSchedl.
2021. Investigating gender fairness of recommendation algorithms in the music domain.Inf. Process. Manag.58,
5 (2021), 102666.
[156] Aditya Krishna Menon and Robert C. Williamson. 2018. The cost of fairness in binary classification. InProceedings
of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency. PMLR, 107–118.
[157] David Miller. 2021. Justice.Stanford Encyc. Philos.Fall 2021 edition. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
[158] Rishabh Misra, MengtingWan, andJulian McAuley.2018.Decomposingfit semanticsfor product size recommenda-
tion in metric spaces. InProceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 422–426.
[159] AadiSwadiptoMondal,RakeshBal,SayanSinha,andGourabK.Patro.2021.Two-sidedfairnessinnon-personalised
recommendations. InProceedings of the AAAI Student Abstract and Poster Program.
[160] MarcoMorik,AshudeepSingh,JessicaHong,andThorstenJoachims.2020.Controllingfairnessandbiasindynamic
learning-to-rank. InProceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval. 429–438.
[161] Razieh Nabi and Ilya Shpitser. 2018. Fair inference on outcomes. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Vol. 32.
[162] Mohammadmehdi Naghiaei, Hossein A. Rahmani, and Yashar Deldjoo. 2022. CPFair: Personalized consumer and
producer fairness re-ranking for recommender systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08085(2022).
[163] Preetam Nandy, Cyrus Diciccio, Divya Venugopalan, Heloise Logan, Kinjal Basu, and Noureddine El Karoui. 2020.
Achieving fairness via post-processing in web-scale recommender systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11350(2020).
[164] Harikrishna Narasimhan, Andrew Cotter, Maya Gupta, and Serena Wang. 2020. Pairwise fairness for ranking and
regression. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 34. 5248–5255.
[165] Jianmo Ni, Jiacheng Li, and Julian McAuley. 2019. Justifying recommendations using distantly-labeled reviews and
fine-grained aspects. InProceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP’19). 188–197.
[166] Alexandra Olteanu, Carlos Castillo, Fernando Diaz, and Emre Kıcıman. 2019. Social data: Biases, methodological
pitfalls, and ethical boundaries.Front. Big Data2 (2019), 13.
[167] Tiago Palma Pagano, Rafael Bessa Loureiro, Fernanda Vitória Nascimento Lisboa, Gustavo Oliveira Ramos Cruz,
RodrigoMatosPeixoto,GuilhermeAragãodeSousaGuimarães,LucasLisboadosSantos,MairaMatosAraujo,Marco
Cruz, Ewerton Lopes Silva de Oliveira, Ingrid Winkler, and Erick Giovani Sperandio Nascimento. 2022. Bias and
unfairness in machine learning models: A systematic literature review.arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08176(2022).
[168] GourabK.Patro,ArpitaBiswas,NiloyGanguly,KrishnaP.Gummadi,andAbhijnanChakraborty.2020.FairRec:Two-
sided fairness for personalized recommendations in two-sided platforms. InProceedings of the WWW Conference.
1194–1204.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:45
[169] Gourab K. Patro, Abhijnan Chakraborty, Niloy Ganguly, and Krishna Gummadi. 2020. Incremental fairness in two-
sidedmarketplatforms:Onsmoothlyupdatingrecommendations.In ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificial
Intelligence, Vol. 34. 181–188.
[170] GourabK.Patro,LorenzoPorcaro,LauraMitchell,QiuyueZhang,MeikeZehlike,andNikhilGarg.2022.Fairranking:
A critical review, challenges, and future directions.arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12662(2022).
[171] Judea Pearl. 2009.Causality. Cambridge University Press.
[172] DinoPedreshi,SalvatoreRuggieri,andFrancoTurini.2008.Discrimination-awaredatamining.In Proceedingsofthe
14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 560–568.
[173] Changhua Pei, Xinru Yang, Qing Cui, Xiao Lin, Fei Sun, Peng Jiang, Wenwu Ou, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2019. Value-
awarerecommendationbasedonreinforcedprofitmaximizationine-commercesystems.In ProceedingsoftheWWW
Conference.
[174] Evaggelia Pitoura, Kostas Stefanidis, and Georgia Koutrika. 2022. Fairness in rankings and recommendations: an
overview.The VLDB Journal(2022), 1–28.
[175] GeoffPleiss,ManishRaghavan,FelixWu,JonKleinberg,andKilianQ.Weinberger.2017.Onfairnessandcalibration.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.30 (2017).
[176] AgoritsaPolyzou,MariaKalantzi,andGeorgeKarypis.2021.FaiREO:Usergroupfairnessforequalityofopportunity
in course recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.05931(2021).
[177] TaoQi,FangzhaoWu,ChuhanWu,PeijieSun,LeWu,XitingWang,YongfengHuang,andXingXie.2022.ProFairRec:
Provider fairness-aware news recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.04724(2022).
[178] Novi Quadrianto and Viktoriia Sharmanska. 2017. Recycling privileged learning and distribution matching for fair-
ness. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.30 (2017).
[179] TaiLeQuy,Arjun Roy,Vasileios Iosifidis, andEirini Ntoutsi.2021.A survey ondatasetsforfairness-awaremachine
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.00530(2021).
[180] HosseinA.Rahmani,MohammadmehdiNaghiaei,MahdiDehghan,andMohammadAliannejadi.2022.Experiments
on generalizability of user-oriented fairness in recommender systems. InProceedings of the SIGIR Conference.
[181] Bashir Rastegarpanah, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Mark Crovella. 2019. Fighting fire with fire: Using antidote data to
improvepolarizationandfairnessofrecommendersystems.In Proceedingsofthe12thACMInternationalConference
on Web Search and Data Mining. 231–239.
[182] SteffenRendle,ChristophFreudenthaler,ZenoGantner,andLarsSchmidt-Thieme.2012.BPR:Bayesianpersonalized
ranking from implicit feedback.arXiv preprint arXiv:1205.2618(2012).
[183] Yehezkel S. Resheff, Yanai Elazar, Moni Shahar, and Oren Sar Shalom. 2018. Privacy and fairness in recommender
systems via adversarial training of user representations.arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03521(2018).
[184] Paul R. Rosenbaum and Donald B. Rubin. 1983. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for
causal effects.Biometrika 70, 1 (1983), 41–55.
[185] Babak Salimi, Luke Rodriguez, Bill Howe, and Dan Suciu. 2019. Interventional fairness: Causal database repair for
algorithmic fairness. InProceedings of the International Conference on Management of Data. 793–810.
[186] Badrul Sarwar, George Karypis, Joseph Konstan, and John Riedl. 2001. Item-based collaborative filtering recommen-
dation algorithms. InProceedings of the 10th International Conference on World Wide Web. 285–295.
[187] Ryoma Sato. 2022. Enumerating fair packages for group recommendations. InProceedings of the 15th ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 870–878.
[188] Tobias Schnabel, Adith Swaminathan, Ashudeep Singh, Navin Chandak, and Thorsten Joachims. 2016. Recommen-
dations as treatments: Debiasing learning and evaluation. InProceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 1670–1679.
[189] AndrewD.Selbst,DanahBoyd,SorelleA.Friedler,SureshVenkatasubramanian,andJanetVertesi.2019.Fairnessand
abstraction in sociotechnical systems. InProceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency.
59–68.
[190] DimitrisSerbos,ShuyaoQi,NikosMamoulis,EvaggeliaPitoura,andPanayiotisTsaparas.2017.Fairnessinpackage-
to-group recommendations. InProceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web. 371–379.
[191] QijieShen, WanjieTao,JingZhang, Hong Wen,Zulong Chen,and QuanLu.2021.SAR-Net: A scenario-aware rank-
ing network for personalized fair recommendation in hundreds of travel scenarios. InProceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 4094–4103.
[192] ShaoyunShi,HanxiongChen,WeizhiMa,JiaxinMao,MinZhang,andYongfengZhang.2020.Neurallogicreasoning.
InProceedings of the Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 1365–1374.
[193] Yuxin Shi, Han Yu, and Cyril Leung. 2021. A survey of fairness-aware federated learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.01872 (2021).
[194] Ilya Shpitser and Judea Pearl. 2012. Identification of conditional interventional distributions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1206.6876 (2012).
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:46 Y. Li et al.
[195] Ashudeep Singh and Thorsten Joachims. 2018. Fairness of exposure in rankings. InProceedings of the 24th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 2219–2228.
[196] Ashudeep Singh and Thorsten Joachims. 2019. Policy learning for fairness in ranking.Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
32 (2019).
[197] JessieJ.Smith,AnasBuhayh,AnushkaKathait,PradeepRagothaman,NicholasMattei,RobinBurke,andAmyVoida.
2023. The many faces of fairness: Exploring the institutional logics of multistakeholder microlending recommenda-
tion. InProceedings of the ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 1652–1663.
[198] Ryosuke Sonoda. 2021. A pre-processing method for fairness in ranking.arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15503(2021).
[199] HariniSureshandJohnV.Guttag.2019.Aframeworkforunderstandingunintendedconsequencesofmachinelearn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.100022 (2019).
[200] Juntao Tan, Shijie Geng, Zuohui Fu, Yingqiang Ge, Shuyuan Xu, Yunqi Li, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2022. Learning and
evaluating graph neural network explanations based on counterfactual and factual reasoning. InProceedings of the
ACM Web Conference. 1018–1027.
[201] Juntao Tan, Shuyuan Xu, Yingqiang Ge, Yunqi Li, Xu Chen, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. Counterfactual explainable
recommendation.In Proceedingsofthe30thACMInternationalConferenceonInformation&KnowledgeManagement .
1784–1793.
[202] Zeyu Tang, Jiji Zhang, and Kun Zhang. 2022. What-is and how-to for fairness in machine learning: A survey, reflec-
tion, and perspective.arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04101(2022).
[203] SotirisTsioutsiouliklis,EvaggeliaPitoura,KonstantinosSemertzidis,andPanayiotisTsaparas.2022.Linkrecommen-
dations for PageRank fairness. InProceedings of the ACM Web Conference. 3541–3551.
[204] Mengting Wan, Jianmo Ni, Rishabh Misra, and Julian McAuley. 2020. Addressing marketing bias in product recom-
mendations. InProceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 618–626.
[205] Mingyang Wan, Daochen Zha, Ninghao Liu, and Na Zou. 2021. Modeling techniques for machine learning fairness:
As u rv e y .arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.03015(2021).
[206] Tianlu Wang, Jieyu Zhao, Mark Yatskar, Kai-Wei Chang, and Vicente Ordonez. 2019. Balanced datasets are not
enough: Estimating and mitigating gender bias in deep image representations. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision. 5310–5319.
[207] Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Xiang Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2021. Deconfounded recommendation for
alleviating bias amplification. InProceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining. 1717–1725.
[208] XuezhiWang,NithumThain,AnuSinha,FlavienProst,EdH.Chi,JilinChen,andAlexBeutel.2021.Practicalcompo-
sitionalfairness:Understandingfairnessinmulti-componentrecommendersystems.In Proceedingsofthe14thACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 436–444.
[209] Yifan Wang, Weizhi Ma, Min Zhang, Yiqun Liu, and Shaoping Ma. 2023. A survey on the fairness of recommender
systems. ACM Transactions on Information Systems41, 3 (2023), 1–43.
[210] YuyanWang,XuezhiWang,AlexBeutel,FlavienProst,JilinChen,andEdH.Chi.2021.Understandingandimproving
fairness-accuracytrade-offsinmulti-tasklearning.In Proceedingsofthe27thACMSIGKDDConferenceonKnowledge
Discovery & Data Mining. 1748–1757.
[211] Min Wen, Osbert Bastani, and Ufuk Topcu. 2019. Fairness with dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08568 (2019).
[212] MinWen,OsbertBastani,andUfukTopcu.2021.Algorithmsforfairnessinsequentialdecisionmaking.In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 1144–1152.
[213] Joshua Williams and J. Zico Kolter. 2019. Dynamic modeling and equilibria in fair decision making.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.06837 (2019).
[214] BlakeWoodworth,SuriyaGunasekar,MesrobI.Ohannessian,andNathanSrebro.2017.Learningnon-discriminatory
predictors. InProceedings of the Conference on Learning Theory. PMLR, 1920–1953.
[215] Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Tao Qi, and Yongfeng Huang. 2022. Are big recommendation models fair to cold users?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.13607(2022).
[216] Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Tao Qi, and Yongfeng Huang. 2022. FairRank: Fairness-aware single-tower ranking
framework for news recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00541(2022).
[217] Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Xiting Wang, Yongfeng Huang, and Xing Xie. 2021. FairRec: Fairness-aware news rec-
ommendation with decomposed adversarial learning. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference.
[218] Haolun Wu, Chen Ma, Bhaskar Mitra, Fernando Diaz, and Xue Liu. 2021. Multi-FR: A multi-objective optimization
method for achieving two-sided fairness in e-commerce recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02951(2021).
[219] Haolun Wu, Bhaskar Mitra, Chen Ma, Fernando Diaz, and Xue Liu. 2022. Joint multisided exposure fairness for
recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00048(2022).
[220] LeWu,LeiChen,PengyangShao,RichangHong,XitingWang,andMengWang.2021.Learningfairrepresentations
for recommendation: A graph-based perspective. InProceedings of the Web Conference. 2198–2208.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

Fairness in Recommendation: Foundations, Methods, and Applications 95:47
[221] Yao Wu, Jian Cao, and Guandong Xu. 2023. FASTER: A dynamic fairness-assurance strategy for session-based rec-
ommender systems.ACM Transactions on Information Systems(2023).
[222] Yao Wu, Jian Cao, Guandong Xu, and Yudong Tan. 2021. TFROM: A two-sided fairness-aware recommendation
model for both customers and providers. InProceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval. 1013–1022.
[223] YiqingWu,RuobingXie,YongchunZhu,FuzhenZhuang,XiangAo,XuZhang,LeyuLin,andQingHe.2022.Selective
fairness in recommendation via prompts. InProceedings of the SIGIR Conference.
[224] YongkaiWu,LuZhang,andXintaoWu.2018.Ondiscriminationdiscoveryandremovalinrankeddatausingcausal
graph. InProceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining.
2536–2544.
[225] Yongkai Wu, Lu Zhang, and Xintao Wu. 2019. Counterfactual fairness: Unidentification, bound and algorithm. In
Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[226] Y.Wu,L.Zhang,X.Wu,andH.Tong.2019.PC-Fairness:Aunifiedframeworkformeasuringcausality-basedfairness.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12586(2019).
[227] YikunXian,ZuohuiFu,ShanMuthukrishnan,GerardDeMelo,andYongfengZhang.2019.Reinforcementknowledge
graph reasoning for explainable recommendation. InProceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 285–294.
[228] Yikun Xian, Tong Zhao, Jin Li, Jim Chan, Andrey Kan, Jun Ma, Xin Luna Dong, Christos Faloutsos, George Karypis,
Shan Muthukrishnan, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. EX3: Explainable attribute-aware item-set recommendations. In
Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 484–494.
[229] Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Yulun Du, Eduard Hovy, and Graham Neubig. 2017. Controllable invariance through adver-
sarial feature learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.11122(2017).
[230] Chen Xu, Sirui Chen, Jun Xu, Weiran Shen, Xiao Zhang, Gang Wang, and Zhenghua Dong. 2023. P-MMF: Provider
max-min fairness re-ranking in recommender system.arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06660(2023).
[231] ShuyuanXu,YingqiangGe,YunqiLi,ZuohuiFu,XuChen,andYongfengZhang.2021.Causalcollaborativefiltering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01868(2021).
[232] Shuyuan Xu, Juntao Tan, Shelby Heinecke, Jia Li, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. Deconfounded causal collaborative
filtering.arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07122(2021).
[233] Longqi Yang, Yin Cui, Yuan Xuan, Chenyang Wang, Serge Belongie, and Deborah Estrin. 2018. Unbiased offline
recommenderevaluationformissing-not-at-randomimplicitfeedback.In Proceedingsofthe12thACMConferenceon
Recommender Systems. 279–287.
[234] Liu Yang, Ben Tan, Vincent W. Zheng, Kai Chen, and Qiang Yang. 2020. Federated recommendation systems. In
Federated Learning. Springer, 225–239.
[235] Tao Yang, Zhichao Xu, and Qingyao Ai. 2022. Effective exposure amortizing for fair top-k recommendation.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.03046(2022).
[236] Sirui Yao and Bert Huang. 2017. Beyond parity: Fairness objectives for collaborative filtering. InProceedings of the
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Conference. 2921–2930.
[237] Sirui Yao and Bert Huang. 2017. New fairness metrics for recommendation that embrace differences.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.09838 (2017).
[238] Zhitao Ying, Dylan Bourgeois, Jiaxuan You, Marinka Zitnik, and Jure Leskovec. 2019. GNNexplainer: Generating
explanations for graph neural networks.Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.32 (2019).
[239] Hao Yuan, Jiliang Tang, Xia Hu, and Shuiwang Ji. 2020. XGNN: Towards model-level explanations of graph neural
networks. InProceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining.
430–438.
[240] MuhammadBilalZafar,IsabelValera,ManuelGomez-Rodriguez,andKrishnaP.Gummadi.2019.Fairnessconstraints:
A flexible approach for fair classification.J. Mach. Learn. Res.20, 1 (2019), 2737–2778.
[241] Meike Zehlike, Francesco Bonchi, Carlos Castillo, Sara Hajian, Mohamed Megahed, and Ricardo Baeza-Yates. 2017.
Fa*ir: A fair top-k ranking algorithm. InProceedings of the ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement. 1569–1578.
[242] Meike Zehlike and Carlos Castillo. 2020. Reducing disparate exposure in ranking: A learning to rank approach. In
Proceedings of the Web Conference. 2849–2855.
[243] Meike Zehlike, Ke Yang, and Julia Stoyanovich. 2021. Fairness in ranking: A survey.arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14000
(2021).
[244] Dell Zhang and Jun Wang. 2021. Recommendation fairness: From static to dynamic.arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03150
(2021).
[245] HaoranZhang,NatalieDullerud,KarstenRoth,LaurenOakden-Rayner,StephenPfohl,andMarzyehGhassemi.2022.
Improving the fairness of chest x-ray classifiers. InProceedings of the Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning.
PMLR, 204–233.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.

95:48 Y. Li et al.
[246] JunzheZhangandEliasBareinboim.2018.Equalityofopportunityinclassification:Acausalapproach.In Proceedings
of the NeurIPS Conference. 3675–3685.
[247] JunzheZhangandEliasBareinboim.2018.Fairnessindecision-making—Thecausalexplanationformula.In Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference,V o l .3 2 .
[248] Xueru Zhang and Mingyan Liu. 2021. Fairness in learning-based sequential decision algorithms: A survey. InHand-
book of Reinforcement Learning and Control. Springer, 525–555.
[249] Xueru Zhang, Ruibo Tu, Yang Liu, Mingyan Liu, Hedvig Kjellstrom, Kun Zhang, and Cheng Zhang. 2020. How do
fair decisions fare in long-term qualification?Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.33 (2020), 18457–18469.
[250] Yongfeng Zhang, Qingyao Ai, Xu Chen, and W. Bruce Croft. 2017. Joint representation learning for top-n recom-
mendation with heterogeneous information sources. InProceedings of the Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management.
[251] Yongfeng Zhang and Xu Chen. 2020. Explainable recommendation: A survey and new perspectives.Found. Trends®
Inf. Retriev.14, 1 (2020), 1–101.
[252] Yongfeng Zhang, Guokun Lai, Min Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yiqun Liu, and Shaoping Ma. 2014. Explicit factor models for
explainablerecommendationbasedonphrase-levelsentimentanalysis.In Proceedings ofthe37thInternationalACM
SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval. 83–92.
[253] Yihao Zhang, Chu Zhao, Weiwen Liao, Wei Zhou, and Meng Yuan. 2023. Asymmetrical attention networks fused
autoencoder for debiased recommendation.ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology(2023).
[254] Yongfeng Zhang, Qi Zhao, Yi Zhang, Daniel Friedman, Min Zhang, Yiqun Liu, and Shaoping Ma. 2016. Economic
recommendation with surplus maximization. InProceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web.
73–83.
[255] YuZheng,ChenGao,XiangLi,XiangnanHe,YongLi,andDepengJin.2021.Disentanglinguserinterestandconfor-
mity for recommendation with causal embedding. InProceedings of the Web Conference. 2980–2991.
[256] Zirui Zhou, Lingyang Chu, Changxin Liu, Lanjun Wang, Jian Pei, and Yong Zhang. 2021. Towards fair federated
learning. InProceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 4100–4101.
[257] Ziwei Zhu, Xia Hu, and James Caverlee. 2018. Fairness-aware tensor-based recommendation. InProceedings of the
27th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 1153–1162.
[258] ZiweiZhu,JinguKim,TrungNguyen,AishFenton,andJamesCaverlee.2021.Fairnessamongnewitemsincoldstart
recommender systems. InProceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval. 767–776.
[259] Zhitao Zhu, Shijing Si, Jianzong Wang, and Jing Xiao. 2022. Cali3f: Calibrated fast fair federated recommendation
system. In2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, 1–8.
[260] Ziwei Zhu, Jianling Wang, and James Caverlee. 2020. Measuring and mitigating item under-recommendation bias
in personalized ranking systems. InProceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval. 449–458.
[261] Ziwei Zhu, Jianling Wang, and James Caverlee. 2021. Fairness-aware personalized ranking recommendation via
adversarial learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.07849(2021).
[262] Ziwei Zhu, Jianling Wang, Yin Zhang, and James Caverlee. 2018. Fairness-aware recommendation of information
curators. InProceedings of the 2nd FATREC Workshop on Responsible Recommendation.
Received 10 January 2023; revised 7 July 2023; accepted 17 July 2023
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 14, No. 5, Article 95. Publication date: October 2023.